We write in reference to a piece by Russell Ruthen, "Strange Matters: Can
Advanced Accelerators Initiate Runaway Reactions?," Science and the
Citizen, Scientific American, August, 1993.

It seems that physicists have long kept behind closed doors their
concern that experiments with particle accelerators might lead to a world-
swallowing catastrophe. This is a good example of the arrogance of scientists,
who routinely take risks affecting the public. The public commonly is not
aware that risks are being taken, and often the scientists do not even admit
to themselves that there are risks. Most scientists have a deep emotional
commitment to their work and are not in a position to be objective about its
negative aspects.

We are not so much concerned about the danger of experiments with
accelerated particles. Since the physicists are not fools, we assume that
the risk is small (though probably not as small as the physicists claim).
But scientists and engineers constantly gamble with human welfare, and
we see today the effects of some of their lost gambles: ozone depletion,
the greenhouse effect, cancer-causing chemicals to which we cannot
avoid exposure, accumulating nuclear waste for which a sure method of
disposal has not yet been found, the crowding, noise and pollution that
have followed industrialization, massive extinction of species and so forth.
For the future, what will be the consequences of genetic engineering?
Of the development of superintelligent computers (if this occurs)? Of
understanding of the human brain and the resulting inevitable temptation
to "improve" it? No one knows.

We emphasize that negative PHYSICAL consequences of scientific
advances often are completely unforeseeable. (It probably never occurred to
the chemists who developed early pesticides that they might be causing many
cases of disease in humans.) But far more difficult to foresee are the negative
SOCIAL consequences of technological progress. The engineers who began
the industrial revolution never dreamed that their work would result in the
creation of an industrial proletariat or the economic boom and bust cycle.
Tie wiser ones may have guessed that contact with industrial society would
disrupt other cultures around the world, but they probably never imagined
the extent of the damage that these other cultures would suffer. Nor did it
occur to them that in the West itself technological progress would lead to a
society tormented by a variety of social and psychological problems.

EVERY MAJOR TECHNICAL ADVANCE IS ALSO A SOCIAL
EXPERIMENT. These experiments are performed on the public by the
scientists and by the corporations and government agencies that pay for
their research. Tie elite groups get the fulfillment, the exhilaration, the
sense of power involved in bringing about technological progress while
the average man gets only the consequences of their social experiments.
It could be argued that in a purely physical sense the consequences are
positive, since life expectancy has increased. But the acceptability of risks
cannot be assessed in purely actuarial terms. "[P]eople also rank risks
based on... how equitably the danger is distributed, how well individuals
can control their exposure and whether risk is assumed voluntarily." (M.
Granger Morgan, "Risk Analysis and Management," Scientific American,
July, 1993, page 35.) Tie elite groups who create technological progress
share in control of the process and assume the risks voluntarily, whereas
the role of the average individual is necessarily passive and involuntary.
Moreover, it is possible that at some time in the future the population
explosion, environmental disaster or the breakdown of an increasingly
troubled society may lead to a sudden, drastic lowering of life expectancy.

However it may be with the PHYSICAL risks, there are good reasons
to consider the SOCIAL consequences of technological progress as highly
negative. This matter is discussed at length in a manuscript that we are
sending to the New York Times.

The engineers who initiated the industrial revolution can be forgiven for
not having anticipated its negative consequences. But the harm caused by
technological progress is by this time sufficiently apparent so that to continue
to promote it is grossly irresponsible. 

Dave-
Of all the things you could conceivably have
done to me, what you have done is by far
the cruelest. You know it, and you knew it
before you did it, even though, with your usual
talent for self-deception, you never permitted
yourself to be conscious of it. You know me
well enough to realize that above all I need
physical freedom, silence, and solitude, and that, 
to me, permanent imprisonment will be a fate
far worse than death. That would be the case
even if I were imprisoned under the best of
conditions. But you know very well that in
prisons there is a high risk of homosexual rape
and of abuse by other prisoners, or even by 
guards; and that even without that prisons are
noisy and crowded; and you are certainly
aware that I can't endure noise and crowding.
The FBI assured you that conditions in 
federal prisons were fine and that I would be
happier in prison, but it is not conceivable 
that you could have believed this except by a
particularly egregious act of self-deception.
You know me, and you knew that the FBI had
very strong ulterior motives for giving you such
assurances. As a matter of fact, I was living
rather happily prior to my arrest, and prison
will be torture for me. 
You tried to get the FBI to arrest me
under conditions that wouldn't involve risk of
my being killed, and you urged the government
not to seek the death penalty for me. But, as
already noted, you knew well that permanent 
imprisonment would be for me far worse 
than death, so your effort to "save" me from
death can only have been an attempt to salve
your conscience by inflicting on me a punishment
that in our society is conventionally regarded as
less severe than death.
It is interesting that you asked the FBI to
promise not to reveal your identity as the
informant, and you were very upset when that
promise was broken. Evidently you were ashamed 
of what you were doing. Why did you do it?
To stop the unabomber? Hardly. You knew that
the unabomber had promised to stop bombing if
his manifesto were published, and you knew that
the promise would be kept if I were the
unabomber, since I am strict about keeping
promises. Furthermore, if I were the unabomber
you could have effectively stopped the bombings
by warning me that you would tip off the FBI
if I didn't desist.
The real reason why you informed on me is
that you hate me. You say you love me, and you
probably do. But you have deep, unresolved and
uncontrolled conflicts concerning me, and your
loving me does not prevent you from hating me
at the same time. This hatred has repeatedly
revealed itself in your behavior toward me
over the years. And what you hate me for
is your own growing sense of inferiority. Your
suspicion that I was the unabomber at last
gave you your opportunity to get a crushing
revenge on big brother for being smarter and
more capable than you are, while maintaining
the illusion that your motives were "moral."
Of course, you will not accept the truth 
about your own motives. I know from long 
experience that it is useless to reason with
you where your emotions are involved, because
you will resort to any sort of rationalization,
no matter how far-fetched, to avoid facing
up to difficult truths. You wear a kind of 
veil over your motives to keep yourself from
being conscious of them, and it is this veil
that enables you to live with yourself. But 
some day the veil will fall away and you will
see yourself as you really are. And on that
day you will go to hell, because, for you,
seeing yourself as you really are will truly
be hell.
Ted

