Written in December or Late Nov. of 1997

Quin, Gary, Scharlette, and (most of all) Judy - 


Of all the things you could have done to me, what you have done is the cruellest. I would rather have been killed, crucified, blinded - anything but this. The only thing you could do now to alleviate the unspeakable torment you are causing me would be to withdraw from the case. But I will bet that not one of you will in fact withdraw, and, whatever rationalizations you may invent, the reason you won't withdraw is that remaining in the case satisfies your own needs, whether your career ambitions, or your emotional needs, or whatever. In order to satisfy your own needs you will continue to cause me this torment rather than withdraw.

What tortures me is not merely what you are doing with the case. If some attorney who was a stranger to me did the same things, it wouldn't cause me nearly so much pain. What tortures me is the fact that you made yourselves my friends and now you do this to me.

It is a matter of principle with me to have nothing to do with the mental health professions. This is a principle to which I have not always adhered strictly. People often fail to adhere strictly to their own principles, but that doesn't mean that the principles aren't genuine.

At any rate, during the months of preparation for this trial, my attorneys, Michael Donahoe, and later Gary Sowards, put me under heavy pressure to undergo examination by certain mental-health professionals. I was extremely reluctant to undergo such examination, but I eventually agreed to do so for two reasons: First, both Mr. Donahoe and Mr. Sowards professed warm friendship for me; they won my affection and I wanted to please them. Second, both Mr. Donahoe and Mr. Sowards assured me repeatedly that the examinations were covered by attorney-client privilege, and that the results of the examinations, and even the fact that the examinations took place, would not be divulged to anyone outside the defense team without my permission. Both Judy, Clarke and Quin Denvir were aware that these promises had been made to me. And all of my attorneys knew that this issue was extremely important to me.

On Tuesday, November 25, in this courtroom, I learned for the first time that my attorneys had divulged to the prosecutors the fact that I'd undergone various mental-health examinations, and moreover had divulged my scores on certain neuropsychological tests. In view of the promises that had been made to me I was horrified and shocked. During the noon break I angrily confronted my attorneys, and they seemed contrite, but they had essentially no excuse to give for what they had done, except that they claimed they thought it was in my best interest as interpreted by them.

During the preparation for this trial, I was very worried about the possibility that my attorneys might misrepresent me and my life in various ways in order to win their case. I repeatedly raised this issue with Mr. Sowards and Ms. Clarke, telling them that I was afraid that their instincts as lawyers would lead them to pursue their single professional concern of winning the case without regard to important concerns of mine, such as my desire to be portrayed truthfully before the world. Mr. Sowards and Ms. Clarke repeatedly assured me that they would help me to pursue my concerns, even when these might conflict with their professional concerns as lawyers.

On Wednesday, November 26, I met with Quin Denvir, Judy Clarke, and Gary Sowards to discuss their breach of promise that I had found out about on the preceding day. I reminded them of the promises they had made me. They admitted that the promises had been made, and they expressed regret at having made them, but what they said was essentially, "Tough luck. Promises or no promises, we are going to pursue our professional goal of winning the case, even if the methods we use are destructive toward your concerns, and there's nothing you can do about it." They put it a little more diplomatically than that, but that is what it amounted to.

This would have been sufficiently painful and humiliating to me in any case, but what made it infinitely worse was the fact that in the year and a half during which I've worked with the members of mmy defense team they have professed warm friendship for me, they have actively cultivated my friendship, so that I developed a strong affection for most of them. Some of them I even loved.

And to have them do this to me - to exploit a lonely man's hunger for friendship in order to manipulate him and deceive him and then to tell him "Tough luck. We're breaking our promises and you're stuck with it." - I've had some very painful and humiliating experiences in my life, but this is by far the worst. It is many times worse than my brother's denouncing me to the FBI and telling lies about me. If, at the time I was arrested, I had been offered a choice between being crucified and having lawyers who would do this to me, I would unhesitatingly have chosen crucification as the lesser evil. I know that sounds like an exaggeration, but it's the sober truth. I think my defense team will at least be honest enough to confirm that I am not prone to exaggeration.

My feelings are such that there is no possible way I can continue to cooperate with these lawyers. Even just to see them makes me sick at heart. So I would ask your honor to do one of three things: 

(a) Allow me to represent myself.

Failing that,

(b) Appoint new counsel for me.

Failing that,

(c) In view of the profound conflict of interest between me and my attorneys, appoint an attorney to represent me against my own attorneys.