Quin and Judy -

The Federal Defenders have screwed me thoroughly.

You talked me out of meeting with Serra while there was still time. Whatever his failings may be, Serra at least could have combatted the image of me as a madman and would have helped me to make my public statement; and I would have been able to preserve the suppression appeal. 

By keeping me in the dark until the trial was in progress, you lost me my chance to preserve the suppression appeal by defending myself. 

Through your public statements and the declarations of your experts, you've reinforced the public's perception of me as a madman.

You prevented my from answering my brother's and mother's allegations earlier; and now the image of me as a madman is so strongly established that there is scarcely any chance of changing it.

I doubt that you fully appreciate the suffering I am undergoing as a result of the way you've dealt with me. Yet I realize that you acted as you did because you felt compelled to do so by the professional principles you adhere to (though your interpretation of those principles seems to me to be oddly mechanical and rigid). I could have forgiven you completely - in fact, at one time I did forgive you completely - if I could have felt assured that you would deal with me in a completely open and straightforward manner in the future.

But there is a persistent air of deviousness in your treatment of me. For instance, you refuse to either admit or deny that you deceived me about the mental-health defense. Yet you know that you did; Kevin Clymo has told me repeatedly that there is no doubt in his mind that it was deception. Later, when you offered to withdraw the 12.2(6) notice, you failed until the last minute to make it clear that you were still going to present me as crazy in the guilt phase. More recently, on January 22, when Burrell argued that I must have known about your mental-health defense prior to November 25 because of the questions you asked jurors about their attitude toward mental-health testimony, I pointed out to Judy that I had twice asked her why those questions were being put to jurors, and that she had answered that this was being done only to make certain jurors unattractive to the government, so that it would use peremptory challenges on them; thus she deflected  my suspicions about the mental-health defense. But when I asked her about this on the 22nd, she refused to either admit or deny that she had answered me that way. 

That is not what I would call frank and open dealing. 

Thus I am never quite certain what you are up to. The worst of it is that, again and again, I come to meetings with you intending to resist you on some point, but as soon as I see you I am overcome by your smiling and friendly faces (maybe you don't fully understand how important those smiling and friendly faces are to someone in my position) and I let you lead me around by the nose. Then after a few hours have passed and your influence has worn off, i find myself wondering why I've been so soft. 

Judy told me again on the 22nd that you would stick by me and that I "wouldn't be able to get rid of" you. About this I had decidedly mixed feelings. On the one hand I was warmed and flattered by this expression of personal commitment to me, but on the other hand I was filled with trepidation because in certain important ways this defense team has been an albatross around my neck and I must get rid of it. 

I could continue with you if you would consistently adhere to a couple of simple principles. First, you would have to be completely frank and open with me. For example, if I said you had done such-and-such, and you felt for some reason that you could neither admit nor deny that you had done it, then you would have to explain to me clearly why you could neither admit nor deny it. Evasiveness I cannot tolerate. Second, if you did something injurious to me, you would have to apologize for it frankly and openly. For example, the fact that you forgot to file a brief on time may have led to my being examined by that government hack, Sally Johnson, rather than by someone recommended by Kevin who perhaps would have been more objective. Yet I've had no word of apology from you for it. I think you know me well enough to know how I would have reacted if I'd made a blunder that had hurt any member of the defense team.

Maybe you'll say you adhere to these principles in the future, but past experience suggests that you probably won't do so very well. Thus, even though I appreciate the fact that on a personal level you've been remarkably kind an generous with me, I look forward to separating myself from this defense team on May 15, and meanwhile I want to keep my interactions with Quin and Judy to a minimym, so as not to be subject to their influence; though I suppose that for practical reasons I will have to talk to them about some things. 

Once you guys are no longer my legal representatives, if you ever want to visit me or write to me I will be very pleased to communicate with you, since we get along much better on a personal level than we do in our legal relationship.

I don't know whether you fully realize how much grief it causes me to think of breaking off with you. I was not exaggerating when I said the defense team had become like a family to me. On my side, at least, the emotional ties  are too strong to be broken by any conflicts we may get into, no matter how bitter. So I hope that our personal friendship can be maintained permanently. But, as I've explained, I feel I have to find other legal advisors.

January 4, 1998.

This evening Judy Clarke gave me an outline of the opening statement she intends to give tomorrow. I was horrified. It's evident that she intends to give a picture of me that essentially supports the lies of my brother and mother. For example, she in effect denies the reality of the verbal abuse I suffered, saying that I was "oversensitive" and hurt by things my mother said that would have "bounced off" most people. This in spite of the fact that in my refutation I showed the abuse was real; that Ralph Meister's declaration states that my mother verbally abused me; that Dr. Kriegler concluded the abuse was real; and that according to Dr. Kriegler my brother said that when our mother got angry it was "close to feeling like what violence would feel like". 

I would think that Judy Clarke just hasn't done her homework, but since she is a highly-regarded lawyer, that doesn't seem likely. The most probable explanation I think is this. Judy Clarke is a highly conventional person in the sense that she believes implicitly in all of the fundamental myths of our society. Since I was accused of being the Unabomber, she assumed from the outset that I was mentally ill, and thereafter she interpreted all information to fit that conclusion. Thus, she saw my perception of abuse as due to abnormal sensitivity on my part and tended to overlook the statements of psychologists (Meister, Kriegler) and others that the abuse was real.

What is disturbing is that, even though she knew all along that the abuse issue was extremely important to me, she never revealed to me until now, at the last minute, that she believed the abuse was at least partly imaginary and that she intended to present it that way at the trial.

It's true that when I objected to her statement about the abuse, she said she would consider changing it, but even if she does so, the warped picture of me that she presents at least in the first draft of her opening statement bodes ill for the future. I can foresee a constant and largely unsuccessful struggle with her to try to get her to present an accurate picture of me.

My situation is simply grotesque. It is acutely demeaning and it progressively breaks down my strength, my energy, my will to resist, and my self-respect. It is impossible to distinguish between friends and enemies. My lawyers supposedly are charged with defending my interests, but they do so not as human beings making their own free choices; they do so as part of a more-or-less mechanistic system that processes me according to more-or-less rigid rules. They consider it their duty to portray me as mentally ill, against my strenuous oppositon, because by doing so they may be able to "save" me from the death penalty (which I would prefer to a life in prison anyway). I bitterly resent their portrayal of me, yet on a personal level they are mostly very likeable people who treat me very kindly and never get angry at me even when I take actions intended to frustrate their "benign" efforts in my behalf. The prosecution, on the other hand, wants to cause my death, but in order to do so they can be expected to do me the favor of trying to refute my own lawyers' attempts to prove me crazy. The judge, who superintends the whole humiliating process, is a kindly and very conscientious man. The Federal Marshals treat me very kindly and take the greatest care to protect my physical safety; the jail is a wretched place, but that results from laziness and incompetence among the jail staff, and from the mere fact of confinement; it is not the result of any malice. So where is my enemy? There isn't any. I am simply caught in a machine that is subjecting me to intolerably humiliating conditions. The people who keep me locked up, my lawyers, the prosecutors, the judge are all just gears in that machine; they inflict misery and degradation on me merely by conscientiously performing their respective duties. 

Since I can do very little for myself while locked up, I am completely helpless and dependent on others, especially my lawyers. Over time, it erodes one's self-confidence. It forces one into a position of demeaning obedience: If I were to attempt to resist the jail people it would only result in my being made still more helpless - more closely watched, no more compunction than I would have in squashing a cockroach. Yet Judy Clarke thinks the Murrays were just wonderful people. She seems to hold this opinion uncritically and without reservation. In spite of this, I find her personality so attractive that I think I enjoy talking with her more than with any other person I've ever known, and I have a strong sense of rapport with her. So is she a friend or an enemy? In practical terms she is an enemy of me and of everything I stand for, but in terms of personal relations she is very friendly toward me and i have warm feelings of friendship toward her.

In contrast, I take very seriously the suffering that David Gelernter underwent. Gelernter is no cliché, but a highly intelligent, thoughtful, talented, and sensitive man whom no one could describe as a mere stereotype. I consider that he deserved what he got, but that is a judgement that I do not adopt lightly and it is one about which I have mixed feelings. 

