September 8, 2001

Sirs: 

Jon Lee Anderson represents Simón Bolívar as having said that his attempt to unify Latin America had been like "plowing the sea" ("The Revolutionary", September 10, page 62, column 3). But what Bolívar actually wrote was, "He who serves a revolution plows the sea" (letter to General Juan José Flores, November 9, 1830; see Simón Bolívar: Escritos políticos, edited by Graciela Soriano, Alianza Editorial, S.A., Madris, 1975, page 169). The distinction is important, because Bolívar was making a remark about revolutions in general, not just about the effort to unify Latin America. Perhaps he had come to realize that, if the word "revolution" is understood to mean an attempt to transform an entire society and not merely to attain a specific political goal such as the independence of a colony, then revolutions never achieve the expected and desired results. Revolutions can be successful only in their destructive aspect. You can destroy an existing social order but you can't build a new one according to a preconceived plan: The outcome of any revolution is completely uncontrollable.

It is extremely important for people to understand that this is the case, and that it applies also to the technological revolution that we are currently going through. If people fully grasped the implications of this, they would shudder.

Ted Kaczynski

I am not accessible by telephone.

Theodore John Kaczynski 

February 7, 2001

Dear Mr. Wenner: 

Thank you for your courteous letter of January 29, which I received yesterday, February 6.

In my letter to you of January 9, I wrote, "I may decide to give an interview soon" (emphasis added). I had been considering the possibility of giving an interview because of an urgent and very disagreeable situation that had been forced on me by the impulsive behavior of a certain person whom I need not identify here. It now looks as if that situation will be resolved without my having to give an interview. However, this is not yet certain. I won't decide definitely whether to give an interview until I've discussed the question with a particular friend of mine.

But if, as seems likely, I decide not to give an interview in the near future, then I apologize for having wasted 

Theodore John Kaczynski



January 9, 2001

Dear Mr. Wenner: 

I may decide to give an interview soon, and I would like to know whether you would be interested in interviewing me or in publishing an article based on an interview with me. 

Owing to my peculiar situation, I will have to impose certain conditions on any interview that I may give: 
1. A representative of mine must be present at all times during the interview. 
2. No questions can be asked that are not approved by my representative. Questions will have to cover certain topics that I will specify, but once those have been covered the interviewing periodical can ask questions on other topics, with the reservation that certain topics will be off limits.
3. No word can be spoken during the interview except when the tape recorder is running. Every word must be recorded.
4. My representative will take immediate possession of each tape as it is finished. He or she will subsequently copy the tapes, keep the originals, and give the copies to you.

As you may know, I am currently involved in a legal appeal, and for legal reasons I have to be careful what I say. I also have to be careful that no one can later claim that I said something that I did not actually say. This is the main reason for the conditions 1 through 4 above. 

I have a friend whom I would trust to interview me and write an article based on the interview. The catch is that she would have to remain anonymous or use a pseudonym. If this is unacceptable to you, then other arrangements should be possible. For example, you might send your own interviewer, and my friend could merely serve as my representative in accord with the conditions 1 through 4 above. Under these circumstances I imagine you would have no objection to her remaining anonymous.

If you are interested in any such proposal, please let me know as soon as may be convenient for you.

Sincerely yours, 
Ted Kaczynski

TED KACZYNSKI to

December 8, 2001

Dear, 

Thanks for your letter postmarked November 30. I very much appreciate the trouble you've gone through in trying to find books for me. However, if the books I mentioned are not readily available, don't worry about it. I could use some books in Spanish so that I can keep in practice with that language, but if there are any good secondhand-book stores in your area you might be able to get some Spanish-language books cheap. I actually prefer old, beat-up books of the kind that you could get at a minimal price. Most any books of history or biography would interest me.

I finished my petition for writ of certiorari and sent it to the Supreme Court on October 30. There is only a slim chance that the Supreme Court will agree to review my case, but if they did agree to review it I might have a good chance of winning.

Here at the prison only one thing has changed as a result of the war-and-terrorism situation. A new system for delivering legal mail to inmates has been set up, and I think it has something to do with the anthrax scare. Mail from lawyers is no longer delivered to our cells. Instead, we are escorted to the mailroom to pick up our legal mail there.

You invited me to comment on recent events. I don't know enough about the Middle East to be able to comment in detail, but provisionally I would say that what is going on now is just the latest phase of the brutal struggle for power between rival states and rival cultures that has been going on almost since the beginning of civilization. The difference is that, today, modern technology makes the struggle far more destructive and dangerous than it ever was before.

As always, politicians and propagandists on both sides use the existence of an external enemy to distract attention from problems at home. When people are frightened by a threat coming from outside their own country, they tend to rally behind their leaders and forget their grievances, and the politicians and propagandists exploit this phenomenon. In our country, the terrorist threat is being used as an excuse to develop and apply surveillance and security technologies that hasten the erosion of our privacy.

Osama Bin Laden has been portrayed as an opponent of modernity. If he were simply that, i might be inclined to support him, but my guess is that his motive is less an opposition to modernity than a desire to create an Islamic "great power" that would be able to compete on equal terms with the other great powers of the world. If that is true, then he is just another ruthless and power-hungry politician, and I have no use for him. 

Now, would you like to tell me a little bit about yourself? Did you write to me because you were concerned about the technology problem? Or for some other reason? 

Best regards, 
Ted Kaczynski 

P.S. I am enclosing a holiday card for you. - TJK

TED KACZYNSKI to

November 1, 2001

U.K.

Dear Professor: 

Thanks for your letter (even though it bears the inauspicious date of October 3 - my brother's birthday). I don't object to word-processed letters.

I'm not sure what you're looking for from me, since you don't ask any specific questions or raise any specific points that you want me to address. But since you're an expert in Islamic studies, I do have some fairly specific points that I'd like you to address. 

Like a lot of people, I've been wondering (and not only since Sept. 11) about the significance of militant Islam, and in particular about the motivations of the militants. Some of the motivating factors involved are obvious: resistance to modernization, religious fanaticism, the leaders' drive for power, and "nationalism." But the relative importance of the various factors, and their exact nature, has been very unclear to me. I use the word "nationalism", in quotes, because the phenomenon is similar to nationalism, but differs from it in that it involves identification not with a nation but with a religion.  

The first thing I read that seemed to throw any real light on the subject was an article in Time Magazine, October 15, 2001, pages 70-71, titled "Osama's Endgame." This article seems to show that Osama Bin Laden's motives (whatever he may tell himself about them) are not primarily religious piety or resistance to modernity, but rather "nationalism" and the drive for power. If the article can be believed, Bin Laden wants nuclear weapons and economic strength for the Islamic world so that it can become a "great power." In other words Bin Laden, behind a veneer of piety, just wants to play the same power-game that states have played almost since the beginning of civilization. It's a game that threatens to become unprecedentedly disastrous, in several respects, because states now have at their disposal the increasinly horrible tools of modern technology. 

But I don't know how seriously to take the Time article, because I've learned through my own experience that the news media are sloppy in their research and do not hesitate to distort the truth.

So my first question is: Do you think the article is roughly accurate in its portrayal of Bin Laden's motives?

Assuming that the article is more-or-less accurate as to Bin Laden personally, to what extent can he be taken as representative of militant Islam as a whole? I don't doubt that there are a great many militant Muslims for whom religious belief is more important than "nationalism" and the drive for wordly power, but I strongly suspect that those for whom wordly power is most important will tend to dominate the movement. Do you agree, or not?

I also wonder about the strength and nature of the resistance to modernity. Assuming that the article mentioned above is correct, it seems clear that Bin Laden and his associates do not reject modern technology and industrialization - since the Islamic world could hardly become a great power without them. Bin Laden et al resist only the social changes that have accompanied modernization, e.g., collapse of traditional values, irreligion, and unbridled hedonism. I think there is significant resistance to modern technology in the Islamic world, but my guess is that the forces of what I've called "nationalism" will easily prevail over any resistance to modern technology. It is interesting that I've received a couple of postcards, unsigned but apparently from the same person, bearing postage stamps of the United Arab Emirates and the words, "From Dubai." No other message; but I assume the sender of the cards knew what I stand for and meant to express his support. 

Do you agree with the foregoing paragraph, or not?

Assuming I am right in thinking that the dominant goal of militant Islam (or at least of its most important leaders) is to create an Islamic "great power", and one that is free of the social changes that have accompanied modernization elsewhere it seems to me that its project is doomed to fail. Creation of a great power would require industrialization; and it would appear that successful, efficient industrialization is incompatible with the existing culture of the Middle East. An attempt to industrialize that region either will fail or will lead to the same kinds of social changes that have accompanied industrialization elsewhere.

Would you comment on the foregoing paragraph?

I would also guess that, even if the leaders were to drop all resistance to modernizing social changes, creation of a fully-developed and efficient industrial economy in the Middle East still would be exceedingly slow and difficult, because the culture isn't amenable to it and won't change easily. In particular, there is not enough social discipline there - or not enough social discipline of the right kind. Do you agree or disagree? 

Even though a fully-developed industrial economy in the Middle East seems unlikely for the foreseeable future, I can well imagine a Middle-Eastern state that as a whole is inefficient and backward, but in which a relatively small, elite minority creates (on a modest scale) an advanced industrial and technological structure within the more backward whole. Maybe some of the Middle Eastern states already are approaching this condition? What do you think about this?

The possible creation of advanced industrial and technological structures in the Middle East worries me exceedingly. I think that what the West is doing with modern technology is criminally reckless. But I also think that the West shows more self-restraint in the use of its (technological and other) power than most other cultures do. In other words, I think most other cultures that to some degree have access to modern technology use it even more recklessly than the West does. (Did you ever ask yourself what some of these Third-World countries are doing with their nuclear waste?) And it seems to me that there is more recklessness in the Middle East than elsewhere. The danger lies not only in the reckless use of intentionally destructive technologies such as that of nuclear weapons, but also in supposedly benign applications of technologies (e.g., genetic engineering) that may have unanticipated, disastrous consequences. What do you think? Am I right in believing that there is a certain kind of recklessness in Middle-Eastern cultures?

Twenty-odd years ago I worked in a small factory with a man from Pakistan. He was very intelligent, an excellent worker, and I liked him very well. But by way of a joke he used to point a knife at me - a box-cutter knife, as it happened - and say, "I weel keel you!" He apparently did not realize that that kind of humor was not acceptable in the West. 

This is only an anecdote, but it illustrates what I think other evidence seems to support - that in Middle Eastern cultures there is far less inhibition about violence, killing, and destructiveness generally than there is in the West. Am I right about this?

Now let me return to your letter. Your fourth paragraph is obscure to me. Do you mean that you formerly opposed loss of human life but are now more ready to accept it? Or vice versa? You indicate that the deaths at the World Trade Center have affected you more deeply than violent deaths elsewhere in the world. Is this because you see the W.T.C. people as more like yourself, so that you can identify more closely with them? You ask whether that makes you a racist. Whether you call yourself a racist is up to you, but personally I think the leftists' use of the word racist is absurd. If the term is to be applied as broadly as the leftists apply it, then probably 99.9% of people throughout the world's history have been racists.

Also, I'm highly skeptical of the claim that "deaths of innocents occur every day in hundreds of thousand [sic] through the depredations of imperialism." Where I've had opportunity to compare information from leftists with information from sources that I have good reason to believe are reliable, I've found the leftists' information to be shamelessly slanted. (Same true of information from the right.) And, assuming that that statistic ("hundreds of thousands of deaths") were correct, how would your leftist friends balance those deaths against the lives saved by Western medicines and medical technology, Western agricultural technology, etc.? (Not that I think that's good. If I could, I would eliminate all advanced technology everywhere, including medical and agricultural technology.)

And why would you run a support group for I.R.A. prisoners? I certainly can't claim to be well-informed about Northern Ireland, but from the little I know it seems to me that what is going on there is essentially just a blood-feud between the Catholics and the Protestants, and I see no reason why any outsider should think that one side was better than the other.

Sincerely yours, 
Ted Kaczynski

Dear Professor
Thanks for your letter (even though it bears
the inauspicious date of October 3 - my brother's
birthday). I don't object to word-processed letters.
I'm not sure what you're looking for from me, 
since you don't ask any specific questions or raise any
specific points that you want me to address. But
since you're an expert in Islamic studies, I do
have some fairly specific points that I'd like you
to address. 
Like a lot of people, I've been wondering (and
not only since Sept. 11) about the significance of
militant Islam, and in particular about the
motivations of the militants. Some of the motivating
factors involved are obvious: resistance to modernization,
religious fanaticism, the leaders' drive for power,
and "nationalism." But the relative importance of
the various factors, and their exact nature, has been
very unclear to me. 
The first thing I read that seemed to throw
any real light on the subject was an article in
Time Magazine, October 15, 2001, pages 70-71, titled
"Osama's Endgame." This article seems to show that 
Osama Bin Laden's motives (whatever he may tell
himself about them) are not primarily religious piety
or resistance to modernity, but rather "nationalism"
and the drive for power. If the article can be 
believed, Bin Laden wants nuclear weapons and 
economic strength for the Islamic world so that
it can become a "great power." In other words
Bin Laden, behind a veneer of piety, just wants
to play the same power-game that states have
played almost since the beginning of civilization.
It's a game that threatens to become
unprecedentedly disastrous, in several respects,
because states now have at their disposal the 
increasingly horrible tools of modern technology.
But I don't know how seriously to take the
Time article, because I've learned through my own
experience that the news media are sloppy in their 
research and do not hesitate to distort the truth.
So my first question is: Do you think the
article is roughly accurate in its portrayal of
Bin Laden's motives?
Assuming that the article is more-or-less
accurate as to Bin Laden personally, to what
extent can he be taken as representative of
militant Islam as a whole? I don't doubt that
there are a great many militant Muslims for whom
religious belief is more important than "nationalism" and
the drive for worldly power, but I strongly
suspect that those for whom worldy power is
most important will tend to dominate the movement. 
Do you agree, or not?
I also wonder about the strength and nature
of the resistance to modernity. Assuming that the
article mentioned above is correct, it seems clear
that Bin Laden and his associates do not
reject modern technology and industrialization - 
since the Islamic world could hardly become a
great power without them. Bin Laden et al
resist only the social changes that have
accompanied modernization, e.g., collapse of traditional
values, irreligion, and unbridled hedonism. I think
there is significant resistance to modern technology
in the Islamic world, but my guess is that the
forces of what I've called "nationalism" will
easily prevail over any resistance to modern
technology. 
Do you agree with the foregoing paragraph, or not?
Assuming I am right in thinking that the 
dominant goal of militant Islam (or at least of 
its most important leaders) is to create an Islamic 
"great power," and one that is free of the social
changes that have accompanied modernization elsewhere
it seems to me that its project is doomed 
to fail. Creation of a great power would require
industrialization; and it would appear that
successful, efficient industrialization is incompatible
with the existing culture of the Middle East. 
An attempt to industrialize that region either will
fail or will lead to the same kinds of social
changes that have accompanied industrialization
elsewhere. 
Would you comment on the foregoing paragraph?
I would also guess that, even if the leaders were
to drop all resistance to modernizing social changes,
creation of a fully-developed and efficient industrial
economy in the Middle East still would be exceedingly
slow and difficult, because the culture isn't 
amenable to it and won't change easily. In
particular, there is not enough social discipline
there - or not enough social discipline of the right
kind. Do you agree or disagree?
Even though a fully-developed industrial economy
in the Middle East seems unlikely for the
foreseeable future, I can well imagine a Middle-
Eastern state that as a whole is inefficient and
backward, but in which a relatively small, elite
minority creates (on a modest scale) an advanced
industrial and technological structure within the
more backward whole. Maybe some of the Middle
Eastern states already are approaching this
condition? What do you think about this?
The possible creation of advanced industrial and 
technological structures in the Middle East worries
me exceedingly. I think that what the West is
doing with modern technology is criminally reckless.
But I also think that the West shows more
self-restraint in the use of its (technological and
other) power than most other cultures do. In 
other words, I think most other cultures that to
some degree have access to modern technology use
it even more recklessly than the West does. (Did
you ever ask yourself what some of these Third-
World countries are doing with their nuclear
waste?) And it seems to me that there is more
recklessness in the Middle East than elsewhere.
The danger lies not only in the reckless use of
intentionally destructive technologies such as that
of nuclear weapons, but also in supposedly benign
applications of technologies (e.g., genetic engineering)
that may have unanticipated, disastrous consequences.
What do you think? Am I right in believing that
there is a certain kind of recklessness in Middle-
Eastern cultures?
Twenty-odd years ago I worked in a small 
factory with a man from Pakistan. He was very
intelligent, an excellent worker, and I liked him very
well. But by way of a joke he used to point a
knife as me - a box-cutter knife, as it happened
- and say, "I weel keel you!" He apparently
did not realize that that kind of humor was
not acceptable in the West. 
This is only an anecdote, but it illustrates 
what I think other evidence seems to support - 
that in Middle Eastern cultures there is far less
inhibition about violence, killing, and destructiveness
generally than there is in the West. Am I 
right about this?
Now let me return to your letter. Your fourth
paragraph is obscure to me. Do you mean that
you formerly opposed loss of human life but are now
more ready to accept it? Or vice versa? You
indicate that the deaths at the World Trade Center
have affected you more deeply than violent deaths
elsewhere in the world. Is this because you see
the W.T.C. people as more like yourself, so that
you can identify more closely with them? You
ask whether that makes you a racist. Whether you
call yourself a racist is up to you, but personally
I think the leftists' use of the word racist is
absurd. If the term is to be applied as broadly as
the leftists apply it, then probably 99.9% of people
throughout the world's history have been racists. 
Also, I'm highly skeptical of the claim that "deaths
of innocents occur every day in hundreds of
thousands [sic] through the depredation of
imperialism." Where I've had opportunity to
compare information from leftists with information
from sources that I have good reason to believe
are reliable, I've found the leftists' information 
to be shamelessly slanted. (Same true of
information from the right.) And, assuming that
that statistic ("hundreds of thousands of deaths")
were correct, how would your leftist friends
balance those deaths against the lives saved by 
Western medicines and medical technology, Western
agricultural technology, etc.? (Not that I think
that's good. If I could, I would eliminate all
advanced technology everywhere, including medical and
agricultural technology.)
And why would you run a support group for 
I.R.A. prisoners? I certainly can't claim to be
well-informed about Northern Ireland, but from the
little I know it seems to me that what is
going on there is essentially just a blood-feud
between the Catholics and the Protestants, and I see
no reason why any outsider should think that one 
side was better than the other.
Sincerely yours, 
Ted Kaczynski


The text of the following extract has been altered only minimally, but the notes
have been greatly expanded beyond those of the original.

You write, "Watching a documentary on a tribe of Amazon Indians, I found
that their life was as ordered as any modern man's. . . their day seemed as
regimented as an office worker's."

You reached this conclusion on the basis of one documentary that you
watched. I would say you were a bit hasty. I can't comment on that particular
tribe because I know nothing about it. You didn't even say what tribe it was.

I wouldn't necessarily say that the life of every primitive people is
less regimented than ours is. Among the Aino (a sedentary hunting-and-
gathering people who formerly occupied part of Japan), ritual obligations
were so elaborate and pervasive that they imposed a heavy psychological
burden, often leading to serious disorders.

But unquestionably many primitive societies were far less regimented
than »urs is. Regarding the Af rican Pygmies, see Colin Turnbull's books
on that subject or Louis Sarno's Songf rom the Forest. One who lived
among the North American Indians early in the 19th century wrote that
they consisted of "individuals who had been educated to prefer almost any
sacrifice to that of personal liberty. ... The Indians individually acknowledge

no superior, nor are they subordinate to any government [I]n general,

the warriors while in their villages are unyielding, exceedingly tenacious of
their freedom, and live together in a state of equality, closely approximated
to natural rights... [Although [their governments] somewhat resemble the
democratic form, still a majority cannot bind a minority to a compliance
with any acts of its own."

Of course, you have to understand that prior to the modern era freedom
was not conceived, as it often is today, as the freedom to just fritter away
one's time in aimless, hedonistic pursuits. It was taken for granted that
survival required effort and self-discipline. But there is a world of difference
between the discipline that a small band of people imposes on itself in order
to meet practical necessities, and discipline that is imposed from the outside
by large organizations.



You write, "High infant- and child-mortality must affect women in these
cultures with a level of angst about their children and their own lives that we
can't imagine."

This is a good point. The anarcho-primitivists find it convenient to
overlook the high infant- and child-mortality rate (typically around 50%)
of most preindustrial societies, including Western society up to the 18th
century. The basic answer to this is simply that you can't have it both ways: If
you want to escape the evils of industrial society, then you have to pay a price
for it. However, it's likely that the high infant-mortality rate was necessary
to preserve the health of the species. Today, weak and sickly babies survive to
pass on their defective genes.

How do primitive women feel about it? I don't know whether anyone
has ever taken the trouble to ask them. It's presumably very painful to them
(and their husbands) when one of their babies dies. But I doubt that they
feel the extreme anxiety that you suggest. A study of the Kalahari Bushmen
found that they had very low levels of psychological stress, and I assume
this included the women. When people see it as normal and expected that
half their children should die during the first few years of life, they probably
take it in stride and don't worry about it unduly. The human race doubtless
has had that high infant- and child-mortality rate for the last million years
and is presumably adapted to it. For a woman to be tormented by constant
anxiety about her children would be maladaptive, hence a tendency to such
anxiety would probably be eliminated by natural selection.

Still, a 50% infant-mortality rate is no joke. It's one of the hard aspects
of forgoing industrial civilization.

You ask, "Is it not possible that our culture's unhappiness stems from our
lack of strong religious beliefs, not our industrial lifestyle?"

Undoubtedly some people are happier for having strong religious
beliefs. On the other hand, I don't think that strong religious belief is
a prerequisite for happiness. Whether religion is usually conducive to
happiness is open to argument.

But the point I want to make here is that the decline of religion in
modern society is not an accident. It is a necessary result of technical progress.
There are several reasons for this, of which I will mention three.

First, as page 42 of Mean April 2001, puts it, "Every curtain science
pulls away is another that God cannot hide behind." In other words, as
science advances, it disproves more and more traditional religious beliefs and
therefore undermines faith.

Second, the need for toleration is antagonistic to strong religious belief.
Various features of modern society, such as easy long-distance transportation,
make mixing of populations inevitable. Today, people of different ethnic
groups and diff erent religions have to live and work side by side. In order
to avoid the disruptive conflicts to which religious hatred would give rise,
society has to teach us to be tolerant.

But toleration entails a weakening of religious faith. If you
unquestioningly believed that your own creed was absolutely right, then
you would also have to believe that every creed that disagreed with it was
absolutely wrong, and this would imply a certain level of intolerance. In order
to believe that all religions are just as good as yours is, you have to have, deep
in your heart, considerable uncertainty about the truth of your own religion.

Third, all of the great world religions teach us such virtues as reverence
and self-restraint. But the economists tell us that our economic health
depends on a high level of consumption. To get us to consume, advertisers
must ofter us endless pleasure, they must encourage unbridled hedonism, and
this undermines religious qualities like reverence and self-restraint.

Regarding your question, there is so much to say in reply to it that I find it
impossible to keep my answer brief. I'll confine myself to three points of the
many that could be made.

(a) It's true that in many societies the extended family, the clan, or the
village could be very confining. The paterfamilias (the "old man" who headed
the extended family), or the council of village elders, kept people on a leash.

But when the paterfamilias and the village elders lost their grip on the leash
as a result of modernization, it was picked up by "the system," which now
holds it much more tightly than the old-timers ever did.

The family or the village was small enough so that individuals within it
were not powerless. Even where all authority was theoretically vested in the
paterfamilias, in practice he could not retain his power unless he listened
and responded to the grievances and problems of the individual members
of his family.

Today, however, we are at the mercy of organizations, such as
corporations, governments and political parties, that are too large to be
responsive to single individuals. These organizations leave us a great deal of
latitude where harmless recreational activities are concerned, but they keep
under their own control the life-and-death issues on which our existence
depends. With respect to these issues, individuals are powerless.

(b) In former times, for those who were willing to take serious risks,
it was often possible to escape the bonds of the family, of the village,
or of feudal structures. In medieval Western Europe, serfs ran away to
become peddlers, robbers, or town-dwellers. Later, Russian peasants ran
away to become Cossacks, black slaves ran away to live in the wilderness
as "Maroons," and indentured servants in the West Indies ran away to
become buccaneers.

But in the modern world there is nowhere left to run. Wherever you
go, you can be traced by your credit card, your social-security number, your
fingerprints. You, Mr. N.,live in California. Can you get a hotel or motel
room there without showing your picture I.D.? You can't survive unless you
fit into a slot in the system, otherwise known as a "job." And it is becoming
increasingly difficult to get a job without making your whole past history
accessible to prospective employers. So how can you defend your statement
that "[m]odern urban society allows one to escape into an anonymity that
family and clan based cultures couldn't"?

Granted, there are still corners of the world where one can find
wilderness, or governments so disorganized that one can escape from the
system there. But these are relics of the past, and they will disappear as the
system continues to grow.

(c) "Today," vou write, "one can... adopt whatever beliefs or lifestyle one
wants. One can also easily travel, experiencing other cultures "


But to what end? What, in practical terms, does one accomplish
by changing one's beliefs or lifestyle, or by experiencing other cultures?
Essentially nothing — except whatever fun one gets from it.

People don't need only fun, they need purposeful work, and they need
to have control not only over the pleasure-oriented aspects of their lives but
over the serious, practical, purposeful, life-and-death aspects. That kind of
control is not possible in modern society because we are all at the mercy of
large organizations.

Up to a point, having fun is good for you. But it's not an adequate
substitute for serious, purposeful activity. For lack of this kind of activity
people in our society get bored. They try to relieve their boredom by having
f un. They seek new kicks, new thrills, new adventures. They masturbate
their emotions by experimenting with new religions, new art-forms,
travel, new cultures, new philosophies, new technologies. But still they are
never satisfi ed, they always want more, because all of these activities are
pur pose/ ess. People don't realize that what they really lack is serious, practical,
purposeful work — work that is under their own control and is directed to the
satisfaction of their own most essential, practical needs.

You ask, "How do we know that the breakdown of technological society
won't lead to a simpler but more oppressive system?"

We don't know it. If the technological system should break down
completely, then in areas unsuitable for agriculture — such as rugged
mountains, arid plains, or the subarctic — people would probably be
nomadic, supporting themselves as pastoralists or by hunting and
gathering. Historically, nomadic peoples have tended to have a high degree
of personal freedom.

But in areas suitable for large-scale, sedentary, intensive agriculture,
people would probably support themselves by that kind of agriculture.
And under those conditions it's likely that an oppressive landlord-class
would tend to develop, like the feudal nobility of medieval Europe or the
latifundistas of modern Latin America.

But even under the most oppressive conditions of the past, people were
not as powerless as they are today. Russian serfs, f or example, had means
of resisting their landlords. They engaged in deception, theft, poaching,
evasion of work, arson. If a peasant got angry enough, he would kill his
landlord. If many peasants got angry at the same time, there would be a
bloody revolt, a "jacquerie."

It's not a pretty picture. But it is at least arguable that Russian serfs
had more freedom — the kind of freedom that really counts — than does the
average well-trained, modern middle-class person, who has almost unlimited
freedom in regard to recreational activities but is completely impotent vis-a-
vis the large organizations that control the conditions under which he lives
and the life-and-death issues on which his existence depends.

If the technoindustrial system collapses the probable result will be a
reversion to a situation roughly equivalent to that which existed several
hundred years ago, in the sense that people will live under widely varying
conditions in different parts of the world. There will be sickness and
health, full bellies and starvation, hatred and love, brotherhood and ethnic
bitterness, war and peace, justice and oppression, violence and kindliness,
freedom and servitude, misery and contentment. But it will be a world
in which such a thing as freedom will at least be possible, even though
everyone might not have it.

If this were all that were involved, one might reasonably argue that it
would be better to maintain the existing system rather than encourage it to
collapse. If the collapse is rapid — as I think it probably will have to be — there
is bound to be bloodshed, starvation, and death for many people. Though
our society is a generally unhappy one, most people are not sufficiently
dissatisfi ed to want to undergo great risks and hardships in order to achieve
an outcome that will by no means be universally idyllic.

But there is much more at stake than the relative advantages of a
collapse versus the currently existing conditions of life. We also have to
ask where so-called "progress"will take us in the future. What kinds of
monstrous crimes will be committed with the godlike powers of the new
technology? Will human behavior be so regulated through biological and
psychological techniques that the concept of freedom becomes meaningless?
Will there be environmental disasters, even disasters that will make the
world uninhabitable? Will we be replaced by machines or by bioengineered
freaks? The future is impossible to predict. But two things are certain:

First, all of the deepest human values, and the qualities that have
been most respected and admired since prehistoric times, will become
meaningless or obsolete in the techno-world of the future. What is the
meaning of personal identity if you are someone else's clone? What is the
meaning of achievement if your innate abilities have been planned for you
by biotechnicians? What is the meaning of free will if your behavior can be
predicted and guided by psychologists, or explained in mechanistic terms by
neurophysiologists? Without free will, what is the meaning of freedom or
of moral choice? What is the meaning of nature when wild organisms are
allowed to survive only where and as the system chooses, and when they are
altered by genes introduced, accidentally or intentionally, by human beings?

Already we can see that the prevailing concepts of traditional values
like loyalty, friendship, honesty, and morality have been seriously altered
under modern conditions. Courage has been devalued, personal honor has
practically disappeared. In the future, with intelligent machines, human
manipulation of other humans' genetic endowment, and the fact of living in a
wholly artificial environment, conditions of life will be so radically different,
so far outside the range of anything that the human race has experienced in
the past, that all traditional values will become irrelevant and will die. The
human race itself will be transformed into something entirely different from
what it has been in the past.

Second, whatever may happen with technology in the future, it will
not be rationally planned. Technology will not be used "wisely." In view of
our society's past record, anyone who thinks that technology will be used
wisely is completely out of touch with reality. Technology will take us on
a course that we can neither predict nor control. All of history, as well as
understanding of complex systems in general, supports this conclusion. No
society can plan and control its own development.

The changes that technology will bring will be a hundred times more
radical, and more unpredictable, than any that have occurred in the past. Hie
technological adventure is wildly reckless and utterly mad, and the people
who are responsible for it are the worst criminals who have ever lived. They
are worse than Hitler, worse than Stalin. Neither Stalin nor Hitler ever
dreamed of anything so horrible.

Who says I love to read and write? Of course, when you're stuck in prison
you have to have some sort of entertainment, and reading and writing are
better than watching television (which I do not do). But when you're living
out in the mountains you don't need entertainment. During my best time in
the mountains I did very little reading, and what writing I did was mostly
in my diary and was not for pleasure but for the purpose of recording my
experiences so that I would never lose the memory of them.

Later, beginning roughly around 1980, I did embark on a program
of reading. But that was purposeful reading, mostly in the social sciences.
My goal was to understand more about human nature and about history,
especially about the way societies develop and change.

I've never had anything but contempt for the so-called "'60s kids," the
radicals of the Vietnam- War era. (The Black Panthers and other black
activists are possible exceptions, since black people had then, and still have
today, more genuine grievances on the score of discrimination than anyone
else does.) I was a supporter of the Vietnam War. I've changed my mind
about that, but n«t for the reasons you might expect.

I knew all along that our political and military leaders were fighting the
war for despicable reasons — for their own political advantage and for the
so-called "national interest. "I supported the war because I thought it was
necessary to stop the spread of communism, which I believed was even more
dangerous to freedom, and even more committed to technology, than the
system we have in this country is.

I've changed my mind about the war because I've concluded that I vastly
overestimated the danger of communism. I overestimated its danger partly
as a result of my «wn naivety and partly because I was influenced by media
propaganda. (At the time, I was under the mistaken impression that most
journalists were reasonably honest and conscientious.)

As it turned out, communism broke down because of its own
inefficiency, hence no war was needed to prevent its spread. Despite its
ideological commitment to technology, communism showed itself to be
less effective than capitalism in bringing about technological progress.
Finally — again because of its own inefficiency — communism was far less
successful than it would have liked to be in strangling individual freedom.
Thirty years ago I accepted the image of communist countries that the
media projected. I believed that they were tightly regulated societies in
which virtually the individual's every move was supervised by the Party or
the State. Undoubtedly this was the way the communist leaders would have
liked to run their countries. But it now seems that because of corruption and
inefficiency in communist systems the average man in those countries had a
great deal more wiggle-room than was commonly assumed in the West. Very
instructive is Robert W.lhurston's study, Life and Terror in Stalin's Russia,
1934-1941 (Yale University Press, 1996).

On the basis oflhurston's information, one could plausibly argue
that the average Russian worker under Stalin actually had more personal
freedom than the average American worker has had at most times during
the 20th century. This certainly was not because the communist leaders
wanted the workers to have any freedom, but because there wasn't much
they could do to prevent it.

You write thatyou "could go on-line and learn all about" me. Yes, and to
judge from the Internet postings that people have sent me, probably most of
what you learned was nonsense. Leaving aside the question of the accuracy
of the information you get from the Internet and assuming for the sake of
argument that the Internet is a wholly beneficial source of information, still
it weighs very little when balanced against the negative aspects of technology.



