TED KACZYNSKI to 

December 18, 2002

Dear

Thanks for your letter and christmas card. Thank you very much also for ordering the book for me. I appreciate it.

Yes, Colorado can get cold. But compared to Montana, where I used to live, it seems fairly mild.

To answer your questions, I don't know what the U.S. should do about Osama Bin Laden. To tell the truth, I don't read too much in the newspapers and news magazines, so I don't know very much about the situation. But as far as I can make out, nobody knows what to do about Bin Laden.

As for Saddam Hussein, yes, I would guess that President Bush is serious about making war on him. I would guess that it probably is warranted. I don't think all these petty little dictators around the world should be allowed to develop nuclear weapons.

Merry Christmas and Happy New Year, 

Ted Kaczynski

9 / 18 / 02

TJK to

such as cleaning the cell and bagging up my dirty laundry laundry.

You kindly offered to give me further help. I could use one photocopy of the Epilogue (titles "The Bushmen of 1989") of the 1989 edition of The
Harmless People, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. I could also use a photocopy of the article "Hunters and gatherers: Economic behavior in bands",
by E. Cashdan, which appears in S. Platter (Ed.), Economic Anthropology, Stanford University Press, 1989. I would ask my Lady-Love () to get these
materials for me, but unfortunately she is sick at present.

Sincerely yours,

Ted Kaczynski

October 19, 2002

Ted Kaczyski 
to 

Dear Ms. NAAM:

Thanks for your letter of October 3. You ask whether you can be my "second lady love". I've put that question to Lady Love #1, and she says "no".
There is to be no Lady Love #2. As for pictures of myself, I don't think I have any here with me, except possibly a few that I need to save. But if 
you send me a picture of myself, yes, I will sign it for you. And, yes, you can send me a picture of yourself. 

I have to be honest with you: My only reason for corresponding with you at present is that you are kind enough to help me by sending me copies of materials that I need. It's possible that friendship between us may develop eventually, but I have room for only one Lady Love, and she is Lady Love #1, to whom I am committed once and for all.

But I do appreciate very much your willingess to help me obtain published materials that I need.

Best regards,

ted Kaczynski 

November 4, 2002

Ted Kaczysnki 
to

Dear Ms. NAAM:

I have received your two letters dated 10/26/02 and your Halloween card. 

I have already signed one picture of myself for you, and I'm not going to sign any more. I am returning to you herewith, unsigned, all of the pictures that you sent me with your letters of 10/26/02, including the photo of yourself. 

In both of your letters of 10/26/02 you address me as "sweetheart". I don't think that Lady Love No. 1 would be comfortable with the tone your letters are taking, and I know that I am not comfortbale with it. So I am breaking off my correspondence with you. You will not hear from me again. 

Sincerely yours,

Ted Kaczynski 