February 19, 2004

Ted Kaczynski 
to 

Dear NAAM, 

Thanks for your two postcards, one postmarked 02 2004, and the other dated February 10, 2004. I'm glad that you had such a succesful trip. But there is disastrous news: NAAM has cancer. According to the latest estimate from the oncologist, if the cancer is at stage 1, she has a 47% chance of living five years; if the cancer has progressed to stage 2 she has a 26% chance. They won't know whether the cancer is at stage 1 or stage 2 until after NAAM  has surgery on February 23. If she dies it will break my heart, because I love this woman. All we can do is hope for the best. 

I am sure that NAAM would appreciate hearing from you. 

Best regards, 

Ted

p.S It hust doesn't seem fair is only 50 years old. That's young to get cancer. She has a right to except at least a couple of more decades of life. And now this ... 

- Ted

Januart 14, 2004

Ted Kaczynski 

[Corrected first draft]

Dear

Thanks for your letter of January 2. I very much appreciate the fact that you told NAAM about my letter to you, so that she knew that I was trying to get in touch with her. I had been afraid she would die thinking I had let her down, since I was unable to get a letter though her. I don't think any of my letters ever did reach her. Through NAAM and the prison chaplain I was given a P.O. box ONlEESBAAR I was supposed to write to her, NAAM. But my letters to that address have been coming  back marked "NO SUCH NUMBER": Clearly, someone screwed up. 

Our very good friend NAAM, good as gold -- visisted NAAM about 12 hours before she dies, and he told her that I loved her and was "with her". She was only very slightly responsive, but she was responsive enough so that it appeared she onderstood what NAAM told her. 

Knowing what you and NAAM told NAAM relieves my my mind, because I wouldn't have wanted her to die thinking I had to let her down. 

Again, thank you -- 

Ted

I've been able to identify only three ways (apart from modest reforms) in
which human beings' intentions concerning the future of their own society
can be realized successfully: (i) Intelligent administration can prolong
the life of an existing social order. (E.g., if 19th-century Russian Tsars
had been a great deal less competent than they were, tsarism might have
broken down earlier than it did. If Nicholas II had been a great deal more
competent than he was, tsarism might have lasted a few decades longer.)

(ii) Revolutionary action can bring about, or at least hasten, the breakdown
of an existing social order. (E.g., if there had been no revolutionary
movement in Russia, a new Tsar would doubtless have been appointed on
the abdication of Nicholas II and tsarism would have survived for a while.)

(iii) An existing social order can sometimes be extended to encompass
additional territory. (E.g., the social order of the West was successfully
extended to Japan following World War II.)

If I'm right, and if we want to exert any rational influence (beyond
modest reforms) on the future of our own society, then we have to choose
one of the foregoing alternatives.

You sent me a copy of Bill Joy's article "Why the Future Doesn't Need Us,"
and you said you would be interested in my assessment of it. I read the
article soon af ter it came out. I had already read elsewhere of most of the
technological hazards described by Joy, but I considered his article useful
because it gave further inf ormation about such hazards. Also, the fact
that even a distinguished technophile like Bill Joy is scared about where
technology is taking us should help to persuade people that the dangers
of technology are real. Apart from that I was unimpressed by Joy's article.
I assume that his technical expertise is solid, but it seems to me that his
understanding of human nature and of how human societies work is at a
naive level. A couple of people who wrote to me about the article expressed
similarly unenthusiastic opinions of it.

To give an example of what I consider to be Joy's naivete, he writes:

"Verifying compliance will also require that scientists and engineers
adopt a strong code of ethical conduct. ..and that they have the courage to

whistleblow as necessary, even at high personal cost [T]he Dalai Lama

argues that the most important thing is for us to conduct our lives with love
and compassion for others, and that our societies need to develop a stronger
notion of universal responsibility and of our interdependency...."

If Bill Joy thinks that anything will be accomplished by this kind of
preaching, then he is out of touch with reality. This part of his article would
be funny if what is at stake weren't so desperately serious.

I've reread Joy's article to see if I had been missing anything, but I found
that my impression of it was the same as before. Of course, it's possible that
the article has merits that I've overlooked.

I don't particularly consider small-scale technology to be acceptable; it's
simply inevitable. See ISAIF, paragraphs 207-212. 1 see no way of getting
rid of it. People can't use organization-dependent technology if the social
organization breaks down. E.g., you can't drive a car if the refineries aren't
producing gasoline. But how could people be prevented from using small-
scale technology? E.g., working steel, building a water-wheel, or ploughing
and planting fields?

You ask whether I would consider a primitive steam-engine to be
small-scale technology. To give a confident answer I would have to
know more than I do about primitive steam-engines and their possible
applications, but I think that steam-engines probably cannot be small-scale
technology. "[Newcomen steam-engines'] heavy fuel consumption made
them uneconomical when used where coal was expensive, but in the British
coalfields they performed an essential service by keeping deep mines clear
of water "An autonomous local community, without outside assistance,
would find it very difficult to build an adequate steam-engine, and the
engine probably would be of little use to such a community. Considering the
eff ort required to build and maintain the engine, to produce oil to lubricate
it, and to collect firewood to fuel it, any work the engine might do for a
small community could probably be done more efficiently with human or
animal muscle-power. Steam engines very likely could have been invented
much earlier than they were, but — I would guess — they would have been of
little use until certain 17th- and 18th-century economic and technological
developments offered work for which steam engines were appropriate.

I'm quite sure that it will be impossible to control post-revolution conditions,
but I think you're quite right in saying that a "positive social vision" is
necessary. However, the social ideal I would put forward is that of the
nomadic hunting-and-gathering society.

First, I would argue that in order to be successful a revolutionary
movement has to be extremist. Jacques Ellul says somewhere that a revolution
must take as its ideal the opposite of what it intends to overthrow. Trotsky
wrote: "The different stages of a revolutionary process [are] certified by a
change of parties in which the more extreme always supersedes the less.

The nomadic hunting-and-gathering society recommends itself as a social
ideal because it is at the opposite extreme of human culture from the
technological society.

Second, if one takes the position that certain appurtenances of
civilization must be saved, e.g., cultural achievements up to the 17th century,
then one will be tempted to make compromises when it comes to eliminating
the technoindustrial system, with the possible or probable result that one will
not succeed in eliminating the system at all. If the system breaks down, what
will happen to the art museums with their priceless paintings and statues?
Or to the great libraries with their vast stores of books? Who will take care
of the artworks and books when there are no organizations large enough and
rich enough to hire curators and librarians, as well as policemen to prevent
looting and vandalism? And what about the educational system? Without an
organized system of education, children will grow up uncultured and perhaps
illiterate. Clearly, anyone who feels it is important to preserve human cultural
achievements up to the 17th century will be very reluctant to see a complete
breakdown of the system, hence will look for a compromise solution and will
not take the frankly reckless measures that are necessary to knock our society
off its present technological-determined course of development. Hence, only
those can be effective revolutionaries who are prepared to dispense with the
achievements of civilization.

Third, to most people, a hunting-and-gathering existence will appear
much more attractive than that offered by preindustrial civilization. Even
many modern people enjoy hunting, fishing, and gathering wild fruits and
nuts. I think few would enjoy such tasks as ploughing, hoeing, or threshing.
And in civilized societies the majority of the population commonly have
been exploited in one way or another by the upper classes: If they were not
slaves or serfs, then they often were hired laborers or tenant-farmers subject
to the domination of landowners. Preindustrial civilized societies often
suffered from disastrous epidemics or famines, and the common people
in many cases had poor nutrition. In contrast, hunter-gatherers, except in
the far north, generally had good nutrition. Famines among them were
probably rare. They were relatively little troubled by infectious diseases until
such diseases were introduced among them by more "advanced" peoples.
Slavery and well-developed social hierarchies could exist among sedentary
hunter-gatherers, but (apart from the tendency of women to be in some
degree subordinate to men), nomadic hunter-gatherer societies typically (not
always) were characterized by social equality, and normally did not practice
slavery. (Though I know of one exception: Apparently some Cree Indians
who were probably hunter-gatherers did take slaves.)

Just in case you've read anarcho-primitivist writings that portray the
hunter-gatherer lifestyle as a kind of politically correct Garden of Eden
where no one ever had to work more than 3 hours a day, men and women
were equal, and all was love, cooperation and sharing, that's just a lot of
nonsense, and at your request I'll prove it with numerous citations to the
literature. But even when one discounts the anarcho-primitivists' idealized
version and takes a hard-headed look at the facts, nomadic hunter-gatherer
societies seem a great deal more attractive than preindustrial civilized ones.
I imagine that your chief objection to hunter-gatherer societies as opposed
to (for example) late medieval or Renaissance European civilization would
be their relatively very modest level of cultural achievement (in terms of art,
music, literature, scholarship, etc.). But I seriously doubt that more than a
small fraction of the population of modern industrial society cares very much
about that kind of cultural achievement.

Hunter-gatherer society moreover has proved its appeal as a social ideal:
Anarcho-primitivism seems to have gained wide popularity. One can hardly
imagine equal success for a movement taking as its ideal — for example — late
medieval society. Of course, one has to ask to what extent the success of
anarcho-primitivism is dependent on its idealized portrayal of hunter-
gatherer societies. My guess, or at least my hope, is that certain inconvenient
aspects of hunter-gatherer societies (e.g., male dominance, hard work) would
turn off the leftists, the neurotics, and the lazies but that such societies,
depicted realistically, would remain attractive to the kind of people who
could be eff ective revolutionaries.

I don't think that a worldwide return to a hunting-and-gathering
economy would actually be a plausible outcome of a collapse of industrial
society. No ideology will persuade people to starve when they can feed
themselves by planting crops, so presumably agriculture will be practiced
wherever the soil and climate are suitable for it. Reversion to hunting and
gathering as the sole means of subsistence could occur only in regions
unsuitable for agriculture, e.g., the subarctic, arid plains, or rugged
mountains.


I'm not terribly interested in questions of values of the kind you discuss
here, such as "herd values" versus the "will to power." As I see it, the
overwhelmingly dominant problem of our time is that technology threatens
either to destroy the world or to transform it so radically that all past
questions of human values will simply become irrelevant, because the human
race, as we have known it, will no longer exist. I don't mean that the human
race necessarily will become physically extinct (though that is a possibility),
but that the way human beings function socially and psychologically will be
transformed so radically as to make traditional questions of values practically
meaningless. The old-fashioned conformist will become as obsolete as the
old-fashioned individualist.

Since this is the most critical juncture in the history of the human
race, all other issues must be subordinated to the problem of stopping
the technological juggernaut before it is too late. If I advocate a break
with conventional morality, I do so not because I disapprove of the
herd mentality, but because conventional morality acts as a brake on the
development of an effective revolutionary movement. Furthermore, any
effective revolutionary movement probably has to make use of the herd
mentality. Imitativeness is part of human nature, and one has to work with
it rather than preach against it.

Possibly you misinterpret my motives for emphasizing the "power
process."The purpose of doing so is not to exalt the "will to power."There
are two main reasons for discussing the power process. First, discussion
of the power process is necessary for the analysis of the psychology of the
people whom I call "leftists." Second, it is difficult to get people excited about
working to avoid a future evil. It is less difficult to get people excited about
throwing off a present evil. Discussion of the power process helps to show
people how a great deal of present dissatisf action and f rustration results f rom
the fact that we live in a technological society.

I should admit, though, that I personally am strongly inclined to
individualism. Ideally, I shouldn't allow my individualistic predilections to
influence my thinking on revolutionary strategy but should arrive at my
conclusions objectively. The fact that you have spotted my individualistic
leanings may mean that I have not been as objective as I should have been.

But even leaving aside all questions of "political" utility and considering
only my personal predilections, I have little interest in philosophical
questions such as the desirability or undesirability of the "herd mentality."
The mountains of Western Montana offered me nearly everything I needed
or wanted. If those mountains could have remained just as they were when
I first moved to Montana in 1971, 1 would have been satisfied. The rest of
the world could have had a herd mentality, or an individualistic mentality
or whatever, and it would have been all the same to me. But, of course,
under modern conditions there was no way the mountains could have
remained isolated from the rest of the world. Civilization moved in and
squeezed me, so

Yes, growth in the population of nations and increasing racial/ethnic
diversity no doubt affected social values. But increasing racial/ethnic
diversity was unquestionably a consequence of technological events, namely,
the development »f relatively safe and efficient sailing ships, along with
economic (therefore also technological) factors that provided incentives to
trade, travel, and migrate widely. Presumably, population growth too was
dependent on technological factors, such as improvements in agriculture that
made it possible to feed more people.

I'll draw a distinction between a revolutionary movement and a reform
movement.lhe distinction is not valid in all situations, but I think it is valid
in the present situation.

The objective of a revolutionary movement, as opposed to a reform
movement, is not to make piecemeal corrections of various evils of the social
order. The objectives of a revolutionary movement are (i) to build its own
strength, and (ii) to increase the tension within the social order until those
tensions reach the breaking point.

Correcting this or that social evil is likely to decrease the tensions within
the social order. This is the reason for the classic antagonism between
revolutionary movements and reform movements.

Generally speaking, correction of a given social evil serves the purposes
of a revolutionary movement only if it (a) constitutes a victory for the
revolutionary movement that enhances the movement's prestige, (b)
represents humiliating defeat for the existing social order, (c) is achieved by
methods that, if not illegal, are at least offensive to the existing order, and (d)
is widely perceived as a step toward dissolution of the existing order.

In the particular situation that the world f aces today, there may be also
another case in which partial or piecemeal correction of a social evil may
be useful: It may buy us time. For example, if progress in biotechnology is
slowed, a biological catastrophe will be less likely to occur before we have
time to overturn the system.

To address specifically your argument that a focus on population reduction
is appropriate, at least as an "ancillary approach," I disagree for two reasons:
(I) An effort to reduce population would be futile. (II) Even if it could be
achieved, population reduction would accomplish nothing against the system.
For these reasons, a focus on population reduction would waste time and
energy that should be devoted to efforts that are more useful.

(I) If you were as old as I am and had watched the development of our
society for 50 years, I don't think you would suggest a campaign against
population growth. It has been tried and it has failed. Back in the 1960s and
early 1970s, concern about "the population problem"was "in. "There was even
a national organization called "Zero Population Growth" whose goal was its
name. Of course, it never accomplished anything. In those days, the fact that
population was a problem was a new discover)', but nowadays it's "old hat,"
people are blase, and it's much harder to get people aroused about population
than it was back in the 1960s. Especially since the latest predictions are
that world population will level off at about 9 billion some time around the
middle of this century. Such predictions are unreliable, but they nevertheless
reduce anxiety about runaway population growth.

In any case, you could never get large numbers of people to have
fewer children simply by pointing out to them the problems caused by
overpopulation. As professional propagandists are well aware, reason by
itself is of little use for influencing people on a mass basis. To have any
substantial effect, you would have to resort to the system's own techniques
of propaganda. By dirtying its hands in this way, an anti-system movement
would perhaps discredit itself. Anyhow, it's wildly improbable that such a
movement could be rich enough to mount an effective worldwide or even
nationwide campaign to persuade people to have fewer children. "Propaganda
that aims to induce major changes is certain to take great amounts of time,
resources, patience, and indirection, except in times of revolutionary crisis
when old beliefs have been shattered The Encyclopedia Britannica
Macropsedia article "Propaganda" provides a good glimpse of the technical
basis of modern propaganda, hence an idea of the vast amount of money
you would need in order to make any substantial impression on the
birthrate through persuasion. "Many of the bigger and wealthier propaganda
agencies... conduct 'symbol campaigns' and 'image-building' operations with
mathematical calculation, using quantities of data that can be processed
only by computer,..., etc.,etc (This should lay to rest your suggestion
that "Propaganda can be opposed by counter-propaganda." Unless you have
billions of dollars at your disposal, there's no way you can defeat the system
in a head-on propaganda contest. A revolutionary movement has to find
other means of making an impact.)

How difficult it would be to reduce the birthrate can be seen from
the fact that the Chinese government has been trying to do that for years.
According to the latest reports I've heard (several years ago), they've had only
very limited success, even though they have vastly greater resources than any
revolutionary movement could hope to have.

Furthermore, a campaign against having children could be a kind
of suicide for a movement. The people who were with you wouldn't have
children, your opponents would have children. Since the political orientation
of children tends statistically to resemble that of their parents, your
movement would get weaker with each generation.

And, to put it bluntly, a revolutionary movement needs an enemy,
it needs someone or something to hate. If you are working against
overpopulation, then who is your enemy? Pregnant women? I don't think
that would work very well.

(II) Even assuming you could reduce the birthrate, a population
decline would be of little use and might well be counterproductive. I fail to
understand your statement (page 7 of your letter) that population growth
"seems to drive the whole technoindustrial process forward at an accelerating
rate." Population increase no doubt is an important stimulus for economic
growth, but it's hardly a decisive factor. In developed countries, economic
growth probably occurs more through increasing demand for goods and
services on the part of each individual than through an increase in the
number of individuals. In any case, do you seriously believe that scientists
would stop developing supercomputers and biological technology if the
population started to decline? Of course, scientists need financial support
from large organizations such as corporations and governments. But the
large organizations' support for research is driven not by population growth
but by competition f or power among the large organizations.

So I think wc can say that population is a dependent variable,
technology is the independent variable. It's not primarily population growth
that drives technology, but technology that makes population growth
possible. Furthermore, because overcrowding makes people uncomfortable
and increases stress and aggression, a reduction of population would tend to
decrease the tensions in our society, hence would be contrary to the interests
of a revolutionary movement, which, as already noted, needs to increase social
tension. Even in the unlikely event that a victory on the population issue
could be achieved, I don't think it would satisfy any of the conditions (b), (c),
(d) that I listed earlier in this letter. Arguably, population decline could "buy
us time" in the sense I've mentioned, but when this is weighed against the
other factors I've just described I think the balance comes down decisively
against an effort to reduce population. But a revolutionary movement can
make use of the population issue by pointing to overpopulation as one of the
negative consequences of technological progress.

I don't think the U.S. situation is as unique as you do. In any case, I wouldn't
emphasize the U.S. situation, because there are too many people who are too
ready to focus on the U.S. as the world's villain. I'm not a patriot and not
particularly interested in defending the U.S. Jut obsessive anti-Americanism
distracts attention from the technology problem just as the issues of sexism,
racism, etc., d«. Given the present global technological and economic
situation, if the U.S. weren't playing the role of the world's bully then
probably some other country or group of countries would be doing so. And
if the Russians, for example, were playing that role, I suspect they would play
rougher than the U.S. does.

I'm not sure exactly what you mean by your fi nal remark that there are
"many roads to revolution." But I would argue that a revolutionary movement
can't afford to be diverse and eclectic. It must be flexible, and up to a point
must allow for dissent within the movement. But a revolutionary movement
needs to be unified, with a clear doctrine and goals. I believe that a catchall
movement that tries to embrace simultaneously all roads to revolution will
fail. A couple of cases in point:

A. Under the Roman Empire there were several salvational religious
movements analogous to Christianity. You'll find a discussion of this in
Jerome Carcopino's Daily Life in Ancient Rome. It seems that, with the
exception of Christianity, all of these religious movements were syncretistic
and mutually tolerant; one could belong to more than one of them. Only
Christianity required exclusive devotion. And I don't have to tell you which
religion became in the end the dominant religion of Europe.

B. In the early stage of the Russian Revolution of 1917, the Social
Revolutionary Party was dominant; the Bolshevik Party was small and
isolated. But the Social Revolutionary Party was a catch-all party that took in
everyone who was vaguely in favor of the revolution. "To vote for the Social
Revolutionaries meant to vote for the revolution in general, and involved no
further obligation." The Bolsheviks, in contrast, were reasonably unified
and developed a program of action with clear goals. "The Bolsheviks acted, or
strove to act. ..like uncompromising revolutionists." And in the end it was
the Bolsheviks, not the Social Revolutionaries, who determined the outcome
of the revolution.

I think that as a preliminary to answering your letter of July 27, it would
be a good idea for me to give a more detailed outline of the "road to
revolution" that I envision. The "road" is of course speculative. It's impossible
to foretell the course of events, so any movement aspiring to get rid of the
technoindustrial system will have to be flexible and proceed by trial and
error. It's nevertheless necessary to give a tentative indication of the route to
be followed, because without some idea of where it is going the movement
will flounder around aimlessly. Also, an outline of at least a possible route
to revolution helps to make the idea of revolution seem plausible. Probably
the biggest current obstacle to the creation of an effective revolutionary
movement is the mere fact that most people (at least in the U.S.) don't see
revolution as a plausible possibility.

In the first place, I believe that illegal action will be indispensable.
I wouldn't be allowed to mail this letter if I appeared to be trying to
incite illegal action, so I will say only this much about it: A revolutionary
movement should consist of two separate and independent sectors, an illegal,
underground sector, and a legal sector. I'll say nothing about what the illegal
sector should do. The legal sector (if only for its own protection) should
carefully avoid any connection with the illegal sector.

With the possible exceptions listed in my letter of 08/29/04, the
function of the legal sector would not be to correct any evils of technology.
Instead, its function would be to prepare the way for a future revolution, to
be carried out when the right moment arrives.

Advance preparation is especially important in view of the fact that
the occasion for revolution may arrive at any time and quite unexpectedly.
The spontaneous insurrection in St. Petersburg in February 1917 took all of
Russia by surprise. It is safe to say that this insurrection (if it had occurred
at all) would have been no more than a massive but purposeless outburst of
frustration if the way to revolution had not been prepared in advance. As it
happened, there was already in existence a strong revolutionary movement
that was in a position to provide leadership, and the revolutionaries moreover
had for a long time been educating (or indoctrinating) the workers of St.
Petersburg so that when the latter revolted they were not merely expressing
senseless anger, but were acting purposefully and more or less intelligently.

In order to prepare the way for revolution, the legal sector of the
movement should:

(I) Build its own strength and cohesiveness. Increasing its numbers will
be far less important than collecting members who are loyal, capable, deeply
committed, and prepared for practical action. (The example of the Bolsheviks
is instructive here.)

(II) Develop and disseminate an ideology that will (a) show people how
many dangers the advance of technology presents for the future; (b) show
people how many of their present problems and frustrations derive from the
fact that they live in a technological society; (c) show people that there have
existed past societies that have been more or less free of these problems and
frustrations; (d) offer as a positive ideal a life close to nature; and (e) present
revolution as a realistic alternative.

The utility of (II) is as follows:

As matters stand at the moment, revolution in the stable parts of
the industrialized world is impossible. A revolution could occur only if
something happened to shake the stability of industrial society. It is easy
to imagine events or developments that could shake the system in this
way. To take just one example, suppose a virus created in an experimental
laboratory escaped and wiped out, say, a third of the population of the
industrialized world. But if this happened now, it hardly seems possible
that it could lead to revolution. Instead of blaming the technoindustrial
system as a whole for the disaster, people would blame only the carelessness
of a particular laboratory. Their reaction would be not to dump technology,
but to try to pick up the pieces and get the system running again — though
doubtless they would enact laws requiring much stricter supervision of
biotechnological research in the future.

The difficulty is that people see problems, frustrations, and disasters
in isolation rather than seeing them as manifestations of the one central
problem of technology. If Al Qaeda should set off a nuclear bomb in
Washington, D.C., people's reaction will be, "Get those terrorists!" They
will forget that the bomb could not have existed without the previous
development of nuclear technology. When people find their culture or their
economic welfare disrupted by the influx of large numbers of immigrants,
their reaction is to hate the immigrants rather than take account of the
fact that massive population movements are an inevitable consequence
of economic developments that result from technological progress. If
there is a worldwide depression, people will blame it merely on someone's
economic mismanagement, forgetting that in earlier times when small
communities were largely self-sufficient, their welfare did not depend on
the decisions of government economists. When people are upset about
the decay of traditional values or the loss of local autonomy, they preach
against "immorality" or get angry at "big government, "without any apparent
awareness that the loss of traditional values and of local autonomy is an
unavoidable result of technological progress.

But, if a revolutionary movement can show a sufficient number of
people how the foregoing problems and many others all are outgrowths of
one central problem, namely, that of technology, and if the movement can
successfully carry out the other tasks listed under (II), then, in case of a
shattering event such as the epidemic mentioned above, or a worldwide
depression, or an accumulation of diverse factors that make life difficult or
insecure, a revolution against the technoindustrial system may be possible.

Furthermore, the movement does not have to wait passively for a crisis
that may weaken the system. Quite apart from any activities of the illegal
sector, the dissention sown by the legal sector of the movement may help to
bring on a crisis. For example, the Russian Revolution was precipitated by
the tsarist regime's military disasters in World War I, and the revolutionary
movement may have helped to create those disasters, since "[i]n no other
belligerent country were political conflicts waged as intensively during the
war as in Russia, preventing the effective mobilization of the rear."

In carrying out the task (II) described above, the movement will of
course use rational argument. But as I pointed out in my letter of 8/29/04,
reason by itself is a very weak tool for influencing human behavior on a mass
basis. You have to work also with the nonrational aspects of human behavior.
But in doing so you can't rely on the system's own techniques of propaganda.
As I argued in my letter of 8/29/04, you can't defeat the system in a head-on
propaganda contest. Instead, you have to circumvent the system's superiority
in psychological weaponry by making use of certain advantages that a
revolutionary movement will have over the system. These advantages would
include the following:

(i) It seems to be felt by many people that there is a kind of spiritual
emptiness in modern life. I'm not sure exactly what this means, but "spiritual
emptiness" would include at least the system's apparent inability to provide
any positive values of wide appeal other than hedonistic ones or the simple
worship of technological progress for its own sake. Evidence that many
people find these values unsatisfactory is provided by the existence within
modern society of groups that offer alternative systems of values — values
that sometimes are in confl ict with those of the system. Such groups would
include fundamentalist churches and other, smaller cults that are still farther
from the mainstream, as well as deviant political movements on the left and
on the right. A successful revolutionary movement would have to do much
better than these groups and fill the system's spiritual vacuum with values
that can appeal to rational, self-disciplined people.

(ii) Wild nature still fascinates people. This shown by the popularity of
magazines like National Geographic, tourism to such (semi-)wild places

as remain, and so forth. But, notwithstanding all the nature magazines,
the guided wilderness tours, the parks and preserves, etc., the system's
propaganda is unable to disguise the fact that "progress" is destroying wild
nature. I think that many people continue to find this seriously disturbing,
even apart from the practical consequences of environmental destruction,
and their feelings on this subject provide a lever that a revolutionary
movement can utilize.

(iii) Most people feel a need for a sense of community, or for belonging
to what sociologists call a "reference group.'"The system tries to satisfy this
need to the extent that it is able: Some people find their reference group in
a mainstream church, a Boy Scout troop, a "support group," or the like. That
these system-provided reference groups are for many people unsatisfactory
is indicated by the proliferation of independent groups that lie outside the
mainstream or even are antagonistic toward it. These include, inter alia,
cults, gangs, and politically dissident groups. Possibly the reason why many
people find the system-provided reference groups unsatisfactory is the very
fact that these groups are appendages of the system. It may be that people
need groups that are "their own thing," i.e., that are autonomous and
independent of the system.

A revolutionary movement should be able to form reference groups that
would offer values more satisfying than the system's hedonism. Wild nature
perhaps would be the central value, or one of the central values.

In any case, where people belong to a close-knit reference group, they
become largely immune to the system's propaganda to the extent that that
propaganda conflicts with the values and beliefs of the reference group.
The reference group thus is one of the most important tools by means of
which a revolutionary movement can overcome the system's propaganda.

(iv) Because the system needs an orderly and docile population, it must
keep aggressive, hostile, and angry impulses under firm restraint. There is a
good deal of anger toward the system itself, and the system needs to keep
this kind of anger under especially tight control. Suppressed anger therefore
is a powerf ul psychological force that a revolutionary movement should be
able to use against the system.

(v) Because the system relies on cheap propaganda and requires willful
blindness to the grim prospect that continued technological progress offers,
a revolutionary movement that develops its ideas carefully and rationally
may gain a decisive advantage by having reason on its side. I've pointed out
previously that reason by itself is a very weak tool for influencing people
in the mass. But I think nevertheless that if a movement gives ample
attention to the non-rational factors that affect human behavior, it may
profit enormously in the long run by having its key ideas established on a
solidly rational foundation. In this way the movement will attract rational,
intelligent people who are repelled by the system's propaganda and its
distortion of reality. Such a movement may draw a smaller number of people
than one that relies on a crude appeal to the irrational, but I maintain that a
modest number of high-quality people will accomplish more in the long haul
than a large number of fools. Bear in mind that rationality does not preclude
a deep commitment or a powerful emotional investment.

Compare Marxism with the irrational religious movements that have
appeared in the U.S. The religious movements achieved little or nothing
of lasting importance, whereas Marxism shook the world. Marxism to be
sure had its irrational elements: To many people belief in Marxism served
as an equivalent of religious faith. But Marxism was far from being wholly
irrational, and even today historians recognize Marx's contribution to
the understanding of the effect of economic factors on history. From the
perspective of the 19th and early 20th centuries, Marxism was plausible and
highly relevant to the problems of the time, hence it attracted people of an
entirely different stamp from those who were drawn to religious revivals.

It's possible however that faith in Marxism as dogma may have played
an essential role in the success of the Russian Revolutionary movement. I
read somewhere years ago that Lenin himself did not believe dogmatically
in Marxist doctrine, but considered it inexpedient to challenge the faith of
the true believers) and I suspect that the same must have been true of
others among the more rational and intelligent Marxists of Lenin's time. It
may be that a movement should not try to impose too rigid a rationality on
its adherents, but should leave room for faith. If the movement's ideology
has an underlying rational basis, I would guess that it should be able to
attract rational and intelligent people notwithstanding a certain amount
of nonrational or irrational ideological superstructure. This is a delicate
question, and the answer to it can be worked out only through trial and error.
But I still maintain that a largely rational basis for its position should give a
revolutionary movement a powerful advantage vis-a-vis the system.

In any case, the kind of people who constitute the movement will be
of decisive importance. The biggest mistake that such a movement could
make would be to assume that the more people it has, the better, and to
encourage everyone who might be interested to join it. This is exactly the
mistake that was made by the original Earth First! As it was originally
constituted in the early 1980s, Earth First! may have had the makings of a
genuine revolutionary movement. But it indiscriminately invited all comers,
and — of course! — the majority of comers were leftish types. These swamped
the movement numerically and then took it over, changing its character.
The process is documented by Martha F. Lee, Earth First!: Environmental
Apocalypse, Syracuse University Press, 1995. I do not believe that Earth First!
as now constituted is any longer a potentially revolutionary movement.

The green anarchist/anarcho-primitivist movement, in addition to
attracting leftish types, manifests another kind of personnel problem: It
has attracted too many people who are mentally disorganized and seriously
deficient in self-control, so that the movement as a whole has an irrational
and sometimes childish character, as a result of which I think it is doomed
to failure.

Actually there are some very good ideas in the green anarchist/anarcho-
primitivist movement, and I believe that in certain ways that movement takes
the right approach. But the movement has been ruined by an excessive influx
of the wrong kinds of people.

So a critically important problem facing a nascent revolutionary
movement will be to keep out the leftists, the disorganized, irrational types,
and other unsuitable persons who come flocking to any rebel movement in
America today.

Probably the hardest part of building a movement is the very first step:
One has to collect a handful of strongly committed people of the right
sort. Once that small nucleus has been formed, it should be easier to attract
additional adherents.

A point to bear in mind, however, is that a group will not attract and
hold adherents if it remains a mere debating society. One has to get people
involved in practical projects if one wants to hold their interest. This is true
whether one intends to build a revolutionary movement or one directed
merely toward reform. The first project for the initial handful of people
would be library research and the collection of information from other
sources. Information to be collected would include, for example, historical
data about the ways in which social changes have occurred in past societies,
and about the evolution of political, ideological, and religious movements
in those societies, information about the development of such movements
in our own society during recent decades; results of scholarly studies of
collective behavior; and data concerning the kinds of people involved in
Earth First!, green anarchism, anarchoprimitivism, and related movements
today. Once the group had gathered sufficient information it could design a
provisional program of action, perhaps modifying or discarding many of the
ideas I've outlined on the preceding pages.

But for anyone who seriously wants to do something about the
technology problem, the initial task is quite clear: It is to build a nucleus for
a new movement that will keep itself strictly separate from the leftists and
the irrational types who infest the existing anti-technological movement.


I. I'll begin by summarizing some information from Martin E. P.
Seligman, Helplessness: On Depression, Development, and Death. Here I have
to rely on memory, because I do not have a copy of Seligman's book, nor do
I have extensive notes on it. Seligman arrived at the following conclusions
through experiments with animals:

Take an animal, sub ject it repeatedly to a painful stimulus, and each time
block its efforts to escape from the stimulus. The animal becomes frustrated.
Repeat the process enough times, and the state of frustration gives way to
one of depression. The animal just gives upThe animal has now acquired
"learned helplessness." If, at a later time, you subject the animal to the same
painful stimulus, it will not try to escape from the stimulus even if it could
easily do so.

Learned helplessness can be unlearned. I don't recall the details, but
the general idea is that the animal gets over learned helplessness by making
successful efforts.

Both learning and unlearning of helplessness occur within the specific
area of behavior in which the animal is trained. For example, if an animal
acquires learned helplessness through repeated frustration of its efforts
to escape from electrical shocks, it will not necessarily show learned
helplessness in relation to efforts to get food. But learned helplessness does
to some extent carry over from one area to another: If an animal acquires
learned helplessness in relation to electrical shocks, subsequently it will more
easily become discouraged when its efforts to get food are frustrated. The
same principles apply to unlearning of helplessness.

An animal can be partly "immunized" to learned helplessness: If an
animal is given prior experience in overcoming obstacles through effort,
it will be much more resistant to learned helplessness (hence also to
depression) than an animal that has not had such experience. For example,
if caged pigeons are able to get food only by pushing a lever on an apparatus
that gives them one grain of wheat or the like for each push of the lever, then
they will later acquire learned helplessness much less easily than pigeons that
have not had to work for their food.

My memory of the following is not very clear, but I think Seligman
indicates that laboratory rats and wild rats diff er in that wild rats are
far more energetic and persistent than laboratory ones in trying to save
themselves in a desperate situation. Presumably the wild rats have been
immunized to learned helplessness through successful eff orts made in the
course of their earlier lives.

At any rate, it does appear that purposeful effort plays an essential role in
the psychological economy of animals.

I first read Seligman's book in the late 1980s. The book originally came
out in the early 1970s, and I haven't had much opportunity to read later work
on learned helplessness. But the theory is believed to be valid also for human
beings, and I believe it is the subject of continuing work.

I don't necessarily accept a psychological theory just because some
psychologists say it's true. There's a lot of nonsense in the field, and even
experimental psychologists sometimes draw silly conclusions from their
data. But the theory of learned helplessness squares very neatly with my own
personal experience and with my impressions of human nature gained from
observation of others.

The need for purposeful, successful effort implies a need for competence,
or a need to be able to exercise control, because one's goals can't be attained
if one does not have the competence, or the power to exercise control, that is
necessary to reach the goals. Seligman writes:

"Many theorists have talked about the need or drive to master events in
the environment. In a classic exposition, R. W. White (1959) proposed the
concept of competence. He argued that the basic drive for control had been
overlooked by learning theorists and psychoanalytic thinkers alike. The need
to master could be more pervasive than sex, hunger, and thirst in the lives
of animals and men. . . . J. L. Kavanau (1967) has postulated that the drive to
resist compulsion is more important to wild animals than sex, food, or water.
He found that captive white-footed mice spent inordinate time and energy
just resisting experimental manipulation. If the experimenters turned the
lights up, the mouse spent his time setting them down. If the experimenters
turned the lights down, the mouse turned them up."

This suggests a need not only for power but for autonomy. In fact, such a
need would seem to be implied by the need to attain goals through effort; for
if one's efforts are undertaken in subordination to another person, then those
efforts will be directed toward the other person's goals rather than toward
one's own goals.

Yet the inconvenient fact is that human individuals seem to differ greatly
in the degree of autonomy that they need. For some people the drive for
autonomy is very powerful, while at the other extreme there are people who
seem to need no autonomy at all, but prefer to have someone else do their
thinking for them. It may be that these people, automatically and without
even willing it, accept as their own goals whatever goals are set up for them
by those whose authority they recognize. Another view might be that for
some reason certain people need purposeful effort that exercises their powers
of thinking and decision-making, while other people need only to exercise
their physical and their strictly routine mental capacities. Yet another
hypothesis would be that those who prefer to have others set their goals
for them are persons who have acquired learned helplessness in the area of
thinking and decision-making.

So the question of autonomy remains somewhat problematic. In any
case, it's clear how ISAlF's concept of the power process is related to the
foregoing discussion. As ISAIF explains in §33, the need for the power
process consists in a need to have goals, to make efforts toward those goals,
and to succeed in attaining at least some of the goals; and most people need
a greater or lesser degree of autonomy in pursuing their goals.

If one has had insufficient experience of the power process, then one has
not been "immunized" to learned helplessness, hence one is more susceptible
to helplessness and consequently to depression. Even if one has been
immunized, long-continued inability to attain goals will cause frustration
and will lead eventually to depression. As any psychologist will tell you,
f rustration causes anger, and depression tends to produce guilt feelings, self-
hatred, anxiety, sleep disorders, eating disorders, and other symptoms. (See
ISAIF, §44 and Note 6.) Thus, if the theory oflearned helplessness is correct,
then ISAIF's definition off reedom" in terms of the power process is not
arbitrary but is based on biological needs of humans and of animals.

This picture has support in other quarters. The zoologist Desmond
Morris, in his book The Human Zoo, describes some of the abnormal behavior
shown by wild animals when they are confined in cages, and he explains the
prevalence of abnormal behavior (e.g., child abuse and sexual perversion)
among modern people by comparing present-day humans to zoo animals:
Modern society is our "cage." Morris shows no awareness of the theory of
learned helplessness, but much of what he says dovetails very nicely with that
theory. He even mentions "substitute activities" that are equivalent to ISAIF's
"surrogate activities."

The need for power, autonomy, and purposeful activity is perhaps implicit
in some of EUul's work. Shortly after my trial, a Dr. Michael Aleksiuk sent
me a copy of his book Power Therapy, which contains ideas closely related to
that of the power process. A major theme of Kenneth Keniston's study The
Uncommitted is the sense of purposelessness that afflicts many people in the
modern world. I think he mentions an "instinct of workmanship," meaning a
need to do purposeful work. In the fi rst part of his book Growing Up Absurd,
Paul Goodman discusses as a source of social problems the fact that men
no longer need to do hard, demanding work that is essential for survival.
Reviewing a book by Gerard Piel, Nathan Keyfitz wrote:

"Among other signs of the lack of adaptation [in modern society] is...
purposelessness. Our ancestors, whose work was hard and often dangerous,
always necessary simply to keep alive, seemed to know what they were here
for. Now 'anomie and preoccupation with the isolated self recur as a central
theme of U.S. popular culture. That they find resonance in every other
industrial country suggests that the solving of the economic problem brings
on these quandaries everywhere.'"

Thus, I argue that the power process is not a luxury but a fundamental
need in human psychological development, and that disruption of the power
process is a critically important problem in modern society.

Because of my lack of access to good library facilities I haven't been able
to explore the relevant psychological literature to any significant extent, but
for anyone interested in modern social problems such an exploration should
be well worth the time it would cost.

In answering your letters I'm not going to stick rigidly with the
definition of freedom given in ISAIF, §94, but I will assume throughout
that the kind of freedom that really matters is the freedom to do things that
have important practical consequences, and that the freedom to do things
merely for pleasure, or for "fulfillment," or in pursuit of surrogate activities, is
relatively insignificant. See ISAIF, §72.

"Human dignity" is a very vague term and a broadly inclusive one. But
I will assume that one essential element of human dignity is the capacity to
exert oneself in pursuit of important, practical goals that one has selected
either by oneself or as a member of a small, autonomous group. Thus, both
freedom and dignity, as I will use those terms, are closely involved with the
power process and with the associated biological need.

II. You ask for a "core reason" why things are getting worse. There are two
core reasons.

A. Until roughly ten thousand years ago, all people lived as hunter-
gatherers, and that is the way of life to which we are adapted physically and
mentally. Many of us, including some Europeans,'") lived as hunter-gatherers
much more recently than ten thousand years ago. We may have undergone
some genetic changes since becoming agriculturalists, but those changes
are not likely to have been massive. Hunter-gatherers who survived into
modern times were people very much like ourselves.

As technology has advanced over the millennia, it has increasingly
altered our way of life, so that we've had to live under conditions that have
diverged more and more from the conditions to which we are adapted. This
growing maladaptation subjects us to an ever-increasing strain. The problem
has become particularly acute since the Industrial Revolution, which has
been changing our lives more profoundly than any earlier development in
human history. Consequently, we are suffering more acutely than ever from
maladaptation to the circumstances in which we live. (Robert Wright has
developed this thesis in an article that you might be interested to read.)

I argue that the most important single maladaptation involved derives
from the fact that our present circumstances deprive us of the opportunity
to experience the power process properly. In other words, we lack freedom as
the term is defined in ISAIF, §94.

The argument that "people now have more freedom than ever" is based
on the fact that we are allowed to do almost anything we please as long as it
has no practical consequences. See ISAIF, §72. Where our actions have practical
consequences that may be of concern to the system (and few important
practical consequences are not of concern to the system), our behavior,
generally speaking, is closely regulated. Examples: We can believe in any
religion we like, have sex with any consenting adult partner, take a plane to
China or Timbuktu, have the shape of our nose changed, choose any from
a huge variety of books, movies, musical recordings, etc., etc., etc. But these
choices normally have no important practical consequences. Moreover, they
do not require any serious effort on our part. We don't change the shape
of our own nose, we pay a surgeon to do it for us. We don't go to China or
Timbuktu under our own power, we pay someone to fly us there.

On the other hand, within our own home city we can't go from point A
to point B without our movement being controlled by traffic regulations, we
can't buy a firearm without undergoing a background check, we can't change
jobs without having our background scrutinized by prospective employers,
most people's jobs require them to work according to rules, procedures, and
schedules prescribed by their employers, we can't start a business without
getting licenses and permits, observing numerous regulations, and so forth.

Moreover, we live at the mercy of large organizations whose actions
determine the circumstances of our existence, such as the state of the
economy and the environment, whether there will be a war or a nuclear
accident, what kind of education our children will receive and what media
influences they will be exposed to. Etc., etc., etc.

In short, we have more freedom than ever before to have fun, but we can't
intervene significantly in the life-and death issues that hang over us. Such
issues are kept firmly under the control of large organizations. Hence our
deprivation with respect to the power process, which requires that we have
serious goals and the power to reach those goals through our own effort.

B. The second "core reason" why things are getting worse is that there is
no way to prevent technology from being used in harmful ways, especially
because the ultimate consequences of any given application of technology
commonly cannot be predicted. Theref ore, harm cannot be foreseen until it
is too late.

Of course, the consequences of primitive man's actions may often
have been unpredictable, but because his powers were limited, the negative
consequences of his actions also were limited. As technology becomes
more and more powerful, even the unforeseeable consequences of its well-
intentioned use, — let alone the consequences of its irresponsible or malicious
use — become more and more serious, and introduce into the world a
growing instability that is likely to lead eventually to disaster. See Bill Joy's
article, "Why the Future Doesn't Need Us," Wired magazine, April 2000, and
Martin Rees, Our Final Century.

A. "Objective" factors in history. I assert that the course of history, in the
large, is normally determined primarily by "objective" factors rather than by
human intentions or by the decisions of individuals. Human intentions or the
decisions of individuals may occasionally make a major, long-term difference
in the course «f history, but when this happens the results do not fulfill the
intentions of the individuals or groups that have made the decisions. Some
exceptions, however, can be identified. Human intentions can sometimes be
realized in the following three ways (see my letter of 1/2/04): (i) Intelligent
administration may prolong the life of an existing social order, (ii) It may be
possible to cause, or at least to hasten, the breakdown of an existing social
order, (iii) An existing social order can sometimes be extended so as to
encompass additional territory.

I need to explain what the foregoing means. Human intentions often
are realized, even for a long period, with respect to some particular factor in
society. But, in such cases, human intentions for the society as a whole are
not realized.

For example, in the Soviet Union the Communists achieved some of
their goals, such as rapid industrialization, full employment, and a significant
reduction in social inequality, but the society they created was very different
from what the Bolsheviks had originally intended. (And in the long run
the socialist system failed altogether.) Since the onset of the Industrial
Revolution in the 18th century, people have succeeded in achieving material
abundance, but the result is certainly not the kind of society that was
envisioned by 18th-century proponents of progress. (And today people like
Bill Joy and Martin Rees fear that industrial society may not survive much
longer.) The Prophet Mohammed succeeded in establishing his new religion
as the faith of millions of people; that religion has flourished for nearly
fourteen centuries and may well do so for many centuries more. But: "At the
end of the rule of the 'rightly guided' caliphs, the Prophet's dream of ushering
in a new era of equality and social justice remained unfulfilled...," nor has
that dream been fulfilled today.

To explain further what I mean when I say that history is generally
guided by "objective" factors and not by human intentions or human will, I'll
use an example that presents the issue in simplified form.

Given three factors:

(i) the presence of hunting-and-gathering bands at the eastern extremity
of Siberia;

(ii) the presence of good habitat for humans at the western extremity of
Alaska; and

(iii) the existence of a land-bridge across what is now the Bering
strait, the occupation of the Americas by human beings was a historical
inevitability and was in a certain sense independent of human intention and
of human will.

Of course, human intentions were involved. In order for the Americas to
be occupied, some hunting-and-gathering band at some point had to choose
intentionally to move eastward across the land-bridge. But the occupation
of the Americas did not depend on the intentions of anyone hunting-and-
gathering band — or any dozen bands — because, given the three conditions
listed above, it was inevitable that some band sooner or later would move
across the land-bridge. It is in this sense that major, long-term historical
developments normally result from the operation of "objective" factors and
are independent of human intentions.

The foregoing does not mean that history is rigidly deterministic in
the sense that the actions of individuals and small groups can never have
an important, long-term eff ect on the course of events. For example, if the
period during which the Bering Strait could be crossed had been short, say
50 or 100 years, then the decision of a single hunting-and-gathering band
to cross or not to cross to Alaska might have determined whether Columbus
would find the Americas populated or uninhabited. But even in this case
the occupation of the Americas would not have been a realization of the
intentions of the single band that made the crossing. The intention of that
band would have been only to move into one particular patch of desirable
habitat, and it could have had no idea that its action would lead to the
occupation of two great continents.

B. Natural selection. A principle to bear in mind in considering the
"objective" factors in history is the law of what I call "natural selection":
Social groups (of any size, from two or three people to entire nations)
having the traits that best suit them to survive and propagate themselves,
are the social groups that best survive and propagate themselves. This
of course is an obvious tautology, so it tells us nothing new. But it does
serve to call our attention to factors that we might otherwise overlook. I
have not seen the term "natural selection" used elsewhere in connection
with this principle, but the principle itself has not gone unnoticed. In the
Encyclopedia Britannicawe find:

"These processes were not inevitable in the sense that they corresponded
to any 'law' of social change. They had the tendency, however, to spread
whenever they occurred. For example, once the set of transformations known
as the agrarian revolution had taken place anywhere in the world, their
extension over the rest of the world was predictable. Societies that adopted
these innovations grew in size and became more powerful. As a consequence,
other societies had only three options: to be conquered and incorporated by
a more powerful agrarian society; to adopt the innovations; or to be driven
away to the marginal places of the globe. Something similar might be said of
the Industrial Revolution and other power-enhancing innovations, such as
bureaucratization and the introduction of more destructive weapons."

Notice that there is a difference between the "natural selection" that
operates among human groups and the natural selection that we are familiar
with in biology. In biology, more successful organisms simply replace less
successful ones and are not imitated by them. But in human affairs less
successful groups tend to try to imitate more successful ones. That is, they
try to adopt the social forms or practices that appear to have made the
latter groups successful. Thus, certain social forms and practices propagate
themselves not only because groups having those forms and practices tend
to replace other groups, but also because other groups adopt those forms and
practices in order to avoid being replaced. So it is probably more correct to
describe natural selection as operating on social forms and practices rather
than as operating on groups of people.

The principle of natural selection is beyond dispute because it is a
tautology. But the principle could produce misleading conclusions if applied
carelessly. For example, the principle does not a priori exclude human will as
a factorguiding history.

C. Human will versus "objective" forces of history. In Western Europe,
until recently, bellicosity — a readiness and ability to make war — was an
advantageous trait in terms of "natural selection": Militarily successful
nations increased their power and their territory at the expense of other
nations that were less successful in war. However, I think this is no longer
true, because there is a strong consensus in Western Europe today that war
between two Western European nations is absolutely unacceptable. Any
nation that initiated such a war would be pounced upon by all the rest of
Western Europe and soundly defeated. Thus, in Western Europe, bellicosity
(at least as directed against other Western European nations), is now a
advantageous trait in terms of natural selection, and it is so because of the
human will to avoid war in Western Europe. This shows that human will
can be a "selective force" involved in the process of "natural selection" as it
operates in human affairs.

However (to the extent that it does not rely on the U.S. for protection)
Western Europe as a whole still needs to be prepared for war, because
outside Western Europe there exist other entities (nations or groups of
nations) that might well make war on Western Europe if they thought
they could get away with it. As it is, if any nation outside Western Europe
made war on a Western European nation, and if the latter were unable to
defend itself adequately, the rest of Western Europe would help it to defeat
the aggressor. Thus, by eliminating internal wzvizre and acquiring a certain
degree of unity, Western Europe has become more formidable in war
against any outside entity.

What has happened in Western Europe is simply a continuation of
a process that has been going on for thousands of years: Smaller political
entities group together (whether voluntarily or through conquest) to form a
larger political entity that eliminates internal warfare and thereby becomes
a more successful competitor in war against other political entities. Size
does not always guarantee survival (e.g., consider the breakup of the Roman
Empire), but in the course of history smaller political entities generally have
tended to coalesce to form larger and theref ore militarily more powerful
ones; and this process is not dependent on human intention but results from
"natural selection."

Thus, when we take a relatively localized view of history and consider
only Western Europe over the last several decades, human will appears to
be an important factor in the process of natural selection, but when we take
a broader view and look at the whole course of history, human will appears
insignificant: "Objective" factors have determined the replacement of smaller
political entities by larger ones.

Of course, it's conceivable that human will might some day eliminate
war altogether. A world government might not even be necessary. It would
be enough that there should exist a strong worldwide consensus, similar to
the consensus now existing in Western Europe, that war was unacceptable
and that any nation initiating a war should be promptly crushed by all the
other nations. Bellicosity would then become a highly disadvantageous
trait in terms of natural selection. And, since the whole world would be
encompassed by the consensus, there would be no outside competitor left
against whom it might be necessary to make war.

But you can see how difficult it is to reach the necessary consensus.
Efforts to end war have been going on at least since the end of World War I
with the League of Nations, and outside of Western Europe there has been
little progress in that regard. Moreover, even if conventional warfare could
be ended through an international consensus, organized violence might
well continue, because there are forms of organized violence (e.g., guerrilla
warfare, terrorism) that would be extremely difficult to suppress even if
vigorously opposed by every nation on Earth.

The purpose of the foregoing discussion is not to prove that it is never
possible for human will to change the course of history. If I didn't believe
it were possible, then I wouldn't waste my time writing letters like this one.
But we have to recognize how powerful the "objective" forces of history are
and how limited is the scope for human choice. A realistic appraisal will help
us to discard solutions that appear desirable but are impossible to put into
practice, and concentrate our attention on solutions that may be less than
ideal but perhaps have a chance of success.

D. Democracy as a product of "objective" forces. In your letter of 7/27/04,
you and your colleague offer "democracy" as an example of an improvement
in the human condition brought about by "human action. "I assume that by
"democracy"you mean representative democracy, i.e., a system of government
in which people elect their own leaders. And I assume that in referring
to "human action"you mean that representative democracy became the
dominant form of government in the modern world through a process that
more or less fits the following model: problem perceived — solution devised —
solution implemented — problem solved. If this is what you mean, then I
think you are wrong.

I think the problem of political oppression has been perceived for
thousands of years. Presumably, people have resented political oppression
ever since the beginning of civilization; this is indicated by numerous peasant
revolts and the like that have been recorded in history. If representative
democracy is the solution to the problem of political oppression, then
the solution, too, has long been known and sometimes implemented.
The idea and the practice of representative democracy go back at least to
ancient Athens, and may well go back to prehistoric times, for some of the
aborigines of southeastern Australia practiced representative democracy.

Sixteenth-century Cossacks had "a military organization of a peculiarly
democratic kind, with a general assembly irada) as the supreme authority
and elected officers, including the commander in chief.... " [Seventeenth-
century buccaneers elected their own captains, who could be deposed by
the crew at any time when an enemy was not in sight. Fifteenth-century
Geneva had a democratic government, though perhaps not strictly speaking
a representative democracy since the legislative body consisted of all
citizens. In addition to fully democratic systems, there have been some
partially democratic ones. Under the Roman Republic, for example, public
officials were elected by the assembled people, but the aristocratic Senate was
the dominant political force.

Thus, representative democracy has been tried with varying degrees of
success at many times and places. Nevertheless, among preindustrial civilized
societies the dominant forms of government remained the monarchical,
oligarchic, aristocratic, and feudal ones, and representative democracy was
only a sporadic phenomenon. Clearly, under the conditions of preindustrial
civilization, democracy was not as well adapted for survival and propagation
as other forms of government were. This could have been due to internal
weakness (instability, or a tendency to transmute into other forms of
government), or to external weakness (a democratic government may have
been unsuccessful in competing economically or militarily with its more
authoritarian rivals).

Whatever it was that made preindustrial democracy weak, the situation
changed with the advent of the Industrial Revolution. Suddenly people
began to admire the (semi-)democratic systems of Britain and the United
States, and attempts were made to imitate those systems. If Britain had been
economically poor and militarily weak, and if the United States had been a
stagnant backwater, would their systems have been admired and imitated?
Not likely! Britain was economically and militarily the most successful
nation in Europe, and the United States was a young but dynamically
growing country, hence these two countries excited the admiration and envy
of the propertied classes in other countries. It was the propertied classes,
not the laboring classes, who were primarily responsible for the spread of
democracy. lhat's why Marxists always referred to the democratic revolutions
as "bourgeois revolutions."

The democracies had to survive repeated contests with authoritarian
systems, and they did survive, largely because of their economic and
technological vigor. They won World Wars I and II, and they didn't do so
because soldiers were more willing to fight for a democratic than for an
authoritarian government. No one has ever questioned the bravery or the
fighting spirit of the German and Japanese soldiers. The democracies won
largely because of their industrial might.

Notice that fascism was popular, even to some extent in the U.S.,
between the two World Wars. (Here I use the term "fascism" in its
generic sense, not referring specifically to Mussolini's Fascists.) After
World War II, fascism lost its popularity. Why? Because the fascists lost
the war. If the fascists had won, fascism undoubtedly would have been
admired and imitated.

During much of the Cold War, "socialism" was the watchword
throughout the Third World. It represented the state of bliss to which most
politically-conscious people there aspired. But that lasted only as long as
the Soviet Union appeared to be more dynamic and vigorous than the U.S.
When it became clear that the Soviet Union and other socialist countries
could not keep up with the West economically or technologically, socialism
lost its popularity, and the new watchwords were "democracy" and "free
market."

Thus, democracy has become the dominant political form of the modern
world not because someone decided that we needed a more humane form
of government, but because of an "objective" fact, namely, that under the
conditions created by industrialization, democratic systems are more vigorous
technologically and economically than other systems.

Bear in mind that, as technology continues to progress, there is no
guarantee that representative democracy will always be the political form
best adapted to survive and propagate itself. Democracy may be replaced by
some more successful political system. In fact, it could be argued that this
has already happened. It could plausibly be maintained that, notwithstanding
the continuation of democratic forms such as reasonably honest elections,
our society is really governed by the elites that control the media and lead
the political parties. Elections, it might be claimed, have been reduced to
contests between rival groups of propagandists and image-makers.

Arc things bad and getting worse, and is technology primarily responsible?

A. Arguments that technology has made things bad and is making
them worse are presented throughout ISAIF (the Manifesto), as well as in
the writings of Jacques Ellul, Lewis Mumford, Kirkpatrick Sale, and others.
Your colleague has not addressed these arguments in any specific way. Hie
only substantive arguments that he offers are the four examples of ways

in which things are allegedly getting better. I would be perfectly justified
in dismissing these four examples by pointing out that neither I nor any
responsible commentator has claimed that technology makes everything
worse — everyone knows that technology does some good things. I could then
simply refer your colleague to ISAIF, Ellul, etc., for arguments that the evil
done by technology outweighs the good, and challenge him to answer those
arguments, which so far he has not attempted to do.

Nevertheless, I will consider the four examples in detail (below) because
they offer scope for interesting discussion, and I will make your colleague's
question about whether things are bad and getting worse into an opportunity
to supplement some of the arguments offered in ISAIF and elsewhere.

B. Obviously, any determination as to whether things are bad and getting
worse, and, if so, how bad, involves value judgments, so the question will have
no answer that will be provably correct independently of the system of values
that is applied.

I should mention by the way that in order to justify revolution it is not
necessary, in my opinion, to prove that things will get worse: With respect to
concerns that could be grouped under the very broad rubric of "freedom and
dignity," things are already hid enough to justify revolution. This is another
value- judgment, and I feel safe in assuming that it would be a waste of time
to try to persuade your colleague to agree with it. Even so, I do not think it
will be an idle exercise to call attention here to some facts that are relevant to
the questions of whether things are bad and whether they are getting worse.

C. First let me point out that the answers to your questions as to
whether there is a core reason why things are getting worse, and when the
downhill trend began, are found in my letter of 10/12/04.

D. Your colleague suggests that "things have always been bad for human
society, and that we have no rational reason to expect anything better than
simply staying one step ahead of death.'"This is a highly pessimistic attitude,
even a defeatist one, and on the basis of my readings about primitive
societies I would be rather surprised if such an attitude had been current in
any primitive society prior to the time when the society was damaged by
the intrusion «f civilization. But I actually agree that we have no rational
reason to expect anything better than simply staying one step ahead of
death — because simply staying one step ahead of death is just fine. We've
been adapted by a couple of million years of evolution to a life in which
our survival has depended on the success of our daily eff orts — efforts that
typically were strenuous and demanded considerable skill. Such efforts
represented the perfect fulfillment of the power process, and, though the
evidence admittedly is anecdotal, such evidence as I've encountered strongly
suggests that people thrive best under rugged conditions in which their
survival demands serious efforts — provided that their efforts are reasonably
successful, and that they make those efforts as free and independent men and
women, not under the demeaning conditions of servitude. A few examples:

W. A. Ferris, who lived in the Rocky Mountains as a fur trapper during
the 1840s, wrote that the "Free Men" (hunters and trappers not connected
with an organized fur-company) "lead a venturous and dangerous life,
governed by no laws save their own wild impulses, and bound their
desires and wishes to what their own good rifles and traps may serve them
to procure [T]he toil, the danger, the loneliness, the deprivation of this
condition of being, fraught with all its disadvantages, and replete with
peril, is, they think, more than compensated by the lawless freedom, and
the stirring excitement, incident to their situation and pursuits — Yet so
attached to [this way of life] do they become, that few ever leave it, and
they deem themselves, nay are, ...far happier than the indwellers of towns
and cities...."

Ferris reported that during his own rugged and dangerous life in the
mountains he usually felt "resolute, cheerful, contented, "

Gontran de Poncins wrote of the Eskimos with whom he lived about
1939-1940:

"[T]he Eskimo is constantly on the march, driven by hunger..."
"[T]hese Eskimos aff orded me decisive proof that happiness is a
disposition of the spirit. Here was a people living in the most rigorous
climate in the world,... haunted by famine...; shivering in their tents in the
autumn, fighting the recurrent blizzard in the winter, toiling and moiling
fifteen hours a day merely in order to get food and stay alive. .. .[T]hey ought
to have been melancholy men, men despondent and suicidal; instead, they
were a cheerful people, always laughing, never weary of laughter."

The 19th-century Argentine thinker Sarmiento wrote of the gaucho of
his time:

"His moral character shows the effects of his habit of overcoming
obstacles and the power of nature; he is strong, haughty, energetic. . .he is
happy in the midst of his poverty and his privations, which are not such
for him, who has never known greater enjoyments or desired anything
higher... "

Sarmiento was not romanticizing the gaucho. On the contrary, he
wanted to replace what he called the "barbarism" of the gaucho with
"civilization."

These examples are by no means exceptional. There's plenty more in the
literature that suggests that people thrive when they have to exert themselves
in order to "stay one step ahead of death," and I've encountered very little
that indicates the opposite.

E. It would be instructive to compare the psychological state of primitive
man with that of modern man, but such a comparison is difficult because,
to my knowledge, there were hardly any systematic studies of psychological
conditions in primitive societies prior to the time when the latter were
disrupted by the intrusion of civilization. The evidence known to me is
almost exclusively anecdotal and/or subjective.

Osborne Russell, who lived in the Rocky Mountains in the 1830s and
1840s, wrote:

"Here we found a few Snake Indians comprising 6 men 7 women and
8 or 10 children who were the only Inhabitants of this lonely and secluded
spot. They were all neatly clothed in dressed deer and sheep skins of the best
quality and seemed to be perfectly contented and happy. ...I almost wished
I could spend the remainder of my days in a place like this where happiness
and contentment seemed to reign in wild romantic splendor...."

Such impressions of very primitive peoples are not uncommon,
and are worth noting. But they represent only superficial observations
and almost certainly overlook interpersonal confl icts that would not be
evident to a traveler merely passing through. Colin Turnbull, who studied
the Mbuti pygmies of Africa thoroughly, found plenty of quarreling and
fighting among them. Nevertheless, his impression of their social and
psychological life was on the whole very favorable; he apparently believed
that hunter-gatherers were "untroubled by the various neuroses that
accompany progress." He also wrote that the Mbuti "were a people who
had found in the forest something that made their life more than just
worth living, something that made it, with all its hardships and problems
and tragedies, a wonderful thing full of joy and happiness and free of
care." Turnbull's book The Forest People has been called "romantic,"
but Schebesta, who studied the Mbuti a couple of decades earlier than
Turnbull, and who as far as I know has never been accused of romanticism,
expressed a similar opinion of the pygmies:

"How many and varied are the dangers, but also the joyous experiences,
on their hunting excursions and their innumerable travels through the
primeval forest!"

"Thus the pygmies stand before us as one of the most natural of human
races, as people who live exclusively in accord with nature and without any
violation of their organism. In this they show an unusually sturdy naturalness
and heartiness, an unparalleled cheerfulness and freedom from care."

This "freedom from care," or as we would say nowadays, freedom from
stress, seems to have been generally characteristic of peoples at the hunting-
and-gathering stage or not far beyond it. Poncins's account makes evident
the absence of psychological stress among the Eskimos with whom he lived:

"[The Eskimo] had proved himself stronger than the storm. Like the
sailor at sea, he had met it tranquilly, it had left him unmoved. ...In mid-
tempest this peasant of the Arctic, by his total impassivity, had lent me a
little of his serenity of soul."

"Of course he would not worry. He was an Eskimo."

"[My Eskimos'] minds were at rest, and they slept the sleep of the
unworried."

In discussing the reasons why many whites during colonial times
voluntarily chose to live with the Indians, the historian James Axtell quotes
two white converts to Indian life who referred to "the absence [among the
Indians] of those cares and corroding solicitudes which so often prevail
[among the whites]." As we would put it, the absence of anxiety and
stress. Axtell notes that while many whites chose to live as Indians, very few
Indians made the transition in the opposite direction. Information from
other sources confirms the attractiveness of Indian life to many whites.

What I've just said about anxiety and stress probably applies to
depression as well, though here I'm on shaky ground since I've encountered
very little explicit information about depression in primitive societies. Robert
Wright, without citing his source, states that "when a Western anthropologist
tried to study depression among the Kaluli of New Guinea, he couldn't find
any." Though Schebesta met thousands ofMbuti pygmies, he heard of
only one case of suicide among them, and he never found or heard of any
case of mental illness (Geisteskrankheit), though he did find three persons
who were either feeble-minded (schwachsinnig) or peculiar (Sonderling).

Even in classical (Greek 6c Roman) civilization, depression may have
been rare: "Harris illuminatingly comments on the virtual absence of
reference to anything like depression in [classical] antiquity."

Needless to s;iy, stress and depression were not completely absent Ironi
every hunting-and-gathering society. Depression and suicide could occur
among Poncins's Eskimos, at least among the old people. The Ainu (hunter-
gatherers who were nearly sedentary) suffered f rom such anxiety about
following correct ritual procedure that it of ten led to serious psychological
disorders. But look at the psychological condition of modem man:

"About 45 percent of Australian men said they 'often' or 'almost always'
felt stress. "

"There is certainly a lot of anxiety going around. Anxiety disorder... is
the most common mental illness in the U.S. In its various forms... it afflicts
19 million Americans.... "

"According to the surgeon general, almost 21 percent of children age
9 and up have a mental disorder, including depression, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, and bipolar disorder."

'"The state of college students' mental health continues to decline. ...The
number of freshmen reporting less than average emotional health has been
steadily rising since 1985... 76 percent of students felt 'overwhelmed' last year
while 22 percent were sometimes so depressed they couldn't function. . . .85
percent of [college counseling-center] directors surveyed noted an increase in
severe psychological problems over the past five years "

"Rates of major depression in every age group have steadily increased
in several of the developed countries since the 1940s. ...Rates of depression,
mania and suicide continue to rise as each new birth cohort ages "

"In the U.S., ...the suicide rate in the age group between 15 and 24
tripled between 1950 and 1990; suicide is the third leading cause of death in
this age group"

"A new UC Berkeley study reports that Mexican immigrants to the
United States have only about half as many psychiatric disorders as U.S.-
born Mexican Americans."

One could go on and on.

F. Psychological problems of course represent only one of the ways in
which "things are bad and getting worse. "I will discuss a few of the other
ways later. I want to make clear, though, that statistics on mental disorders,
environmental damage, or other such problems fail to touch certain central
issues. Though improbable, it's conceivable that the system might some day
succeed in eliminating most mental disorders, cleaning up the environment,
and solving all its other problems. But the human individual, however well
the system may take care of him, will be powerless and dependent. In fact,
the better the system takes care of him, the more dependent he will be. He
will have been reduced to the status of domestic animal. See ISAIF, §174
6c Note 12. A conscientious owner may keep his house-dog in perfect
physical and psychological health. But would you want to be a well cared for
domestic pet? Maybe your colleague would be willing to accept that status,
but I would choose an independent and autonomous existence, no matter
how hard, in preference to comfortable dependence and servitude.

G. Your colleague's argument that things are getting better because
"Humanity is 'flourishing'... based on sheer numbers" makes no sense. One of
the principal objections to the technological society is that its food-producing
capacity has allowed the world to become grotesquely overcrowded. I don't
think I need to explain to you the disadvantages of overcrowding.

H . As f or you colleague's claim that the "overall material standard of
living seems t« be increasing," the way that works is that the technoindustrial
system simply defines the term "high standard of living" to mean the kind
of living that the system itself provides, and the system then "discovers" that
the standard of living is high and increasing. But to me and to many, many
other people a high material standard of living consists not in cars, television
sets, computers, or fancy houses, but in open spaces, forests, wild plants
and animals, and clear-flowing streams. As measured by that criterion our
material standard of living is falling rapidly.

IV. Your colleague claims that reform offers a better chance of success
than revolution. He claims that "we. . .would act. . . to restrict technology as
it becomes necessary," and that such action represents "the general pattern."
You and your colleague off er four examples to illustrate this general pattern:
"slavery," "political oppression," "sanitation and waste disposal," and "air and
water pollution."

A. Let's take "political oppression" first.

1 . As I argued in my letter to you of 10/12/04, representative democracy
replaced authoritarian systems not through human choice or human
planning but as a result of "objective" factors that were not under rational
human control. Thus the spread of democracy is not an instance of the
"general pattern" that you propose.

2. Political oppression has existed virtually since the beginning of
civilization, i.e., for several thousand years. An alternative to authoritarian
political systems — representative democracy — has been known at least since
the days of ancient Athens. Yet, even under the most generous view, the time
at which democracy became the world's dominant political form could not
possibly be placed earlier than the 19th century. Thus, even after a workable
solution was known, it took well over 2,000 years for the problem of political
oppression to be (arguably) solved. If it takes 2,000 years for our present
technology-related problems to be solved, we may as well forget about it,
because it will be far, far too late. So your example of political oppression
gives us no reason whatever to be hopeful that our technology-related
problems can be solved in a peaceful and orderly way, and in time.

3. You admit that the replacement of authoritarian systems by
democratic ones often occurred through revolution, but you claim that "many
times it did not (e.g. England, Spain, S. Africa, Eastern European communist
bloc)." However, you're wrong about England and S. Africa; or, at best, you
can claim you are right about them only by insisting on strict adherence to a
technical definition of the term "revolution."

England developed into a full-fledged democracy through a process
that took roughly 61/2 centuries. Since the process took so long, one can't
say it was a revolution. But the process certainly did involve violence and
armed insurrection. The first step toward democracy in England was Magna
Carta, which became law ca 1225 only through a revolt of the barons and an
ensuing civil war (arguably a revolution). At least one other step toward
democracy in England required a very violent insurrection, 1642-49 (again,
arguably a revolution), and the "revolution" of 1688 was nonviolent only
because of the accidental fact that James II declined to fight.

As for South Africa, democracy there for whites only goes back to the
19th century and was peacefully established, but whites never comprised
more than a fifth of the population, and I assume that what you have in
mind is the recent extension of democracy to the entire population. This,
however, occurred at least in part through violent revolutionary action.
"Resistance by black workers continued, and saboteurs caused an increasing
number of deaths and in juries." If the process was not a revolution, then
it was saved fr»m being one only by the fact that the government decided to
grant democracy to all races through a negotiated settlement rather than let
the situation get further out of hand.

In most of the principal nations of Western Europe, democracy was
established through revolution and/or war: In England, partly through
violent insurrection, as noted above; in France, through revolution (1789,
1830, 1848) and war (1870); in Germany and Italy democracy was imposed
from the outside through warfare (World War II). Among the larger
Western European nations, only Spain achieved democracy peacefully, in
1976, after Franco's death in 1975. But Spanish democracy clearly was
only a spin-off of the democracy that had been established by violence
throughout the rest of Western Europe. Spain was an outlier of a thoroughly
democratized, powerful, and economically highly successful Western Europe,
so it was only to be expected that Spain would follow the rest of Western
Europe and become democratic. Would Spain have become democratic if the
rest of Western Europe had been fascist? Probably not. So you can't maintain
that the democratization of Spain occurred independently of the violence
that established democracy throughout the rest of Western Europe.

The same can be said of much of that part of the "Eastern European
communist bloc" that actually has become democratic and done so peacefully.
Countries like Poland and the Czech Republic lie on the fringes of Western
Europe and are very heavily influenced by it. When one looks at Eastern
European countries less closely linked with Western Europe, the status of
democracy there seems considerably less secure. As far as I know, Serbia has
become democratic, but it did not achieve democracy peacefully. I suppose
you realize what is happening in Russia: "President Putin continues to move
his country away from democracy...," etc. As for Belarus: "Belarussian
President Alexander Lukashenko said... that he won a mandate from voters
to stay in power in a... referendum scrapping presidential term limits. But
foreign observers said the vote process was marred by violations.... That
allows the authoritarian president... who has led the nation since 1994,
to run again in 2006. " Lukashenko [is] often branded as Europe's last
dictator." In Ukraine, the future of democracy is still uncertain.

So your purported examples of democracy peacefully achieved look
rather unimpressive. You would have done better to cite the Netherlands and
the Scandinavian countries. The Netherlands' evolution toward democracy
was quite peaceful, though seemingly influenced by the violence elsewhere
in Europe in 1848. Sweden's evolution toward democracy began early
in the 18th century and apparently was entirely peaceful. Norway's
democratization seems to have been equally nonviolent; though Norway
much of the time was not an independent nation. In Denmark on the other
hand I think the absolute monarchy was abolished only as a result of the
1848 revolutions; however, Denmark's progress toward democracy thereafter
was reasonably orderly. Note that all of the foregoing countries, as well
as England, are Germanic countries. Predominantly Germanic Switzerland,
too, adopted democracy readily, though the 1848 revolutions apparently
played an important role. Compare this with the often violent and for a
long time unsuccessful struggles toward democracy of the Latin and Slavic
countries. Germanics seem to take to democracy relatively easily, a point that
I will have occasion to mention later. (It's true that in Germany itself the
first attempt at democracy — the Weimar Republic — failed, but this can be
attributed to peculiarly difficult conditions, namely, the Versailles treaty and
disastrous economic problems.)

But what happened in particular countries is somewhat beside the
point. Consider the worldwide democratization process as a whole:
Democracy was an indigenous and partly violent development in
England. It was established in America through a violent insurrection.
As I pointed out in my letter of 10/12/04, democracy became the world's
dominant political form only because of the economic and technological
success of the democracies, especially the English-speaking countries.
And this economic and technological success was achieved not only
through industrialization at home but also through worldwide expansion
that involved violent displacement of native peoples in North America,
Australia, and New Zealand, and economic exploitation elsewhere that
was often enforced by violence. The democracies repeatedly had to defend
themselves in war against authoritarian systems, notably in World Wars
I and II, and they won those wars only because of the vast economic and
industrial power that they had built, and built in part through violent
conquest and exploitation all over the world.

Thus, democracy became the world's dominant political form
through a process that involved violent insurrection and extensive
warfare, including predatory warfare against weaker peoples who were
to be displaced or exploited.

It should also be noted that democracy, as a political form, cannot be
viewed in isolation; it is just one element of a whole cultural complex that
is associated with industrialization and that we call "modernity." Usually
democracy (in its present-day form) can be successfully and lastingly
implanted in a country only when that country has become culturally
modernized. (India and Costa Rica are probable exceptions.) In my letter of
10/12/04, 1 maintained that democracy had become the world's dominant
political form because it was the political form most conducive to economic
and technological success under conditions of industrialization. It might
possibly be argued that it is not democracy itself, but other elements of the
associated cultural complex that are mainly responsible for economic and
technological success. Singapore achieved outstanding economic success
without democracy; Spain achieved good and Taiwan achieved excellent
economic success even before they were democratized. I still think that
democracy as a political form is an important element of the cultural
complex that confers success in an industrialized world. But whether it is or
not, the fact remains that modern democracy is not a detached phenomenon
but a part of a cultural complex that tends to be transmitted as a whole.

When a country becomes democratized peacefully, what typically
happens is that either the country is so impressed by the success and
dominance of the leading democracies that it willingly tries to absorb their
culture, including democracy; or else, due to the economic dominance
of the democracies, economic forces compel the country to permit the
infi ltration of modern culture, and once the country has become sufficiently
assimilated culturally and economically, it will be capable of democracy.

But in either case the peaceful advent of democracy in any country in
modern times (say, since 1900) is usually a consequence of the fact that
the cultural complex of which democracy is a part has already become
economically and technologically dominant throughout the world. And, as
noted above, democracy and modernity have achieved this dominance, in
important part, through violence.

So your example of democracy — as an allegedly nonviolent reform
designed to solve the problem of political oppression — is clearly invalid. I
want to make clear that my intention in the foregoing discussion has not
been to indict democracy morally, but simply to show that it does not serve
your purpose as an example of nonviolent reform.

B. Much of what I've said about the spread of democracy applies also
to the elimination of slavery. Since the arguments applicable to slavery
are analogous to those I've given in the case of democracy, I'll only sketch
them briefly. First note that rejection of slavery, like democracy and
industrialization, is a feature of the cultural complex that we call "modernity."

1. I would argue that slavery was (partly) eliminated only because, in
the modern world, there are more efficient means of getting people to work.
In other words slavery, due to its economic inefficiency, has been eliminated
from the industrialized world by "natural selection" (see my letter of
10/12/04), not primarily by human will. True, much slavery was eliminated
through conscious humanitarian efforts, but those efforts could not have
had much success if slave societies had been more efficient economically than
the industrializing countries where the antislavery efforts originated. Hence,
the basic cause of the elimination of slavery was economic, not humanitarian.

2. Slavery was widespread for thousands of years before it was (partly)
eliminated in modern times. As I pointed out above, we can't afford to wait
thousands of years for a solution to our technology-related problems, so
your example of slavery gives us no reason to hope for a timely and peaceful
solution to those problems.

3. The elimination of slavery was by no means a nonviolent process.
Slavery was expunged from Haiti through bloody revolution. Slave revolts
occurred repeatedly in at least some slave societies, and, while these
revolts rarely achieved lasting success, it seems safe to assume that they
contributed to the economic inefficiency of slavery that led to its eventually
being superseded by more efficient systems. When slavery was eliminated

in modern times, it was often eliminated through violent intervention from
outside. For example, slavery in the American South was ended by the
Civil War, the bloodiest confl ict in U.S. history, and the Arab slave trade in
Southeast Africa was closed down in 1889 only after war between the slave-
dealers and the colonial powers.

So your example of slavery gives us no reason to hope for a peaceful
solution to anything.

C. Before I address your other two examples, I want to point out
that in focusing on isolated, formal features of societies — on whether
governments were representative democracies or whether human beings were
technically owned as property — you distract attention from more important
questions: How much personal freedom did people have in practice and how
satisfactory were their lives?

If I had to live in a specified society, would I rather live as a slave or as a
non-slave? Of course, I would rather live as a non-slave. Would I prefer that
the society's government should be democratic or authoritarian? All else being
equal, I would prefer that the government should be democratic. For example,
if I were to live in Spain I would rather live in Spain as it was in 1976, after
democratization, than in Spain as it was in 1974, when Franco was still alive.
If I had to live in Rome in AD 100, I would rather live there as a freeman
than as a slave.

When the questions are framed as above, democracy and the elimination
of slavery appear to be unequivocally beneficial. But, as we've seen,
democracy and the elimination of slavery have prevailed not as isolated and
detached features but as part of the cultural complex that we call "modernity."
So what we really need to ask is: How does the quality of life in modern
society compare with that in earlier societies that may have had authoritarian
governments or practiced slavery? Here the answer is not so obvious.

Slavery has taken a wide variety of forms, some of which were very
brutal, as everyone knows. But: "Various Greek and Roman authors report
on how Etruscan slaves dressed well and how they often owned their
own homes. They easily became liberated and rapidly rose in status once
they were freed." In as much of Spanish America as came under Simon
Bolivar's observation, the slave-owner "has made his slave the companion
of his indolence"; he "does not oppress his domestic servant with excessive
labor: he treats him as a comrade " , "The slave... vegetates in a state of
neglect... en joying, so to speak, his idleness, the estate of his lord, and many
of the advantages of liberty; ...he considers himself to be in his natural
condition, as a member of his master's family." Such examples are not
rare exceptions, and it will immediately occur to you to ask whether under
these conditions slaves might not have been better oft than modern wage-
workers. But I would go farther and argue that even under the harsher forms
of servitude many slaves and serfs had more freedom — the kind of freedom
that really counts (see my letter of 10/12/i4) — than modern man does. This,
however, is not the place to make that argument.

I could make a much stronger argument that nominally free (non-slave,
non-serf, etc.) people living under authoritarian systems of past ages often
had greater personal freedom — of the kind that counts — than the average
citizen of a modern democracy does. Again, this is not the place to make
such an argument.

Hut I do want to suggest here that democracy (in the modern sense of
the word) could actually be regarded as a sign of servitude in the following
sense: A modern democracy is able to maintain an adequate level of social
order with a relatively decentralized power structure and relatively mild
instruments of physical coercion only because sufficiently many people
are willing to abide by the rules more or less voluntarily. In other words,
democracy demands an orderly and obedient population. As the historian
Von Laue put it, "Industrial society... requires an incredible docility at the
base of its freedoms." I suggest that this is why the Germanic countries
adjusted to democracy so easily: Germanic cultures tended to produce more
disciplined, obedient, authority-respecting people than the comparatively
unruly Latin and Slavic cultures did. The Latins of Europe achieved stable
democracies only after experience of industrialized living trained them to
a sufficient level of social discipline, and over part of the Slavic world there
still is insufficient social discipline for stable democracy. Social discipline is
even more insufficient in Latin America, Africa, and the Arabic countries.
Democracy succeeded so well in Japan precisely because the Japanese are an
especially obedient, conforming, orderly people.

Thus, it could be argued that modern democracy represents not freedom
but subjection to a higher level of social discipline, a discipline that is
more psychological and based less on physical coercion than old-fashioned
authoritarian systems were.

I can't leave the subject of democracy without inviting you to comment
on this passage of Nietzsche: "Liberal institutions immediately cease to
be liberal as soon as they are attained: subsequently there is nothing more
thoroughly harmful to freedom than liberal institutions. ...As long as they
are still being fought for, these same institutions produce quite different
effects; they then in fact promote freedom mightily. ...For what is freedom?
That one has the will to self-responsibility. .. That one has become more
indifferent to hardship, toil, privation, even to life. That one is ready to
sacrifice men to one's cause, oneself not excepted," Twilight of the Idols
(Gotzen-Damtnerung), §38 (translation of R.J. Hollingdale).

D. Now let's look at your third example, "Sanitation and waste disposal."
It's not clear to me why you chose this particular example. It's just another
one of the innumerable technical improvements that have been devised
during the last few centuries, and you could equally well have cited any of
the others. Of course, none of the responsible opponents of technology has
ever denied that technology does some good things, so your example tells us
nothing new.

Poor sanitation and inefficient waste disposal were bad for the system
and bad for people, so the interests of the system coincided with the interests
of human beings and it was therefore only to be expected that an effective
solution to the problem would be developed.

But the fact that solutions are found in cases where the interests of the
system coincide with the interests of human beings gives us no reason to hope
for solutions in cases where the interests of the system conflict with those of
human beings.

For instance, consider what happens when skilled craftsmen are put out
of work by technical improvements that make them superfl uous. I recently
received a letter from a professional gravestone sculptor who provided me
with a concrete example of this. He had spent years developing skills that
were rendered useless a few years ago by some sort of laser-guided device
that carved gravestones automatically. He's in his forties, unable to find
work, and obviously depressed. This sort of thing has been going on ever
since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, and it will continue to go
on because in this situation the interests of the system confl ict with those
of human beings, so human beings have to give way. Where is the solution
that, according to your theory, society is supposed to have developed? As
far as I know, only two solutions have been implemented: (i) welfare; and
(ii) retraining programs. My guess is that organized retraining programs
cover only a fraction of all workers displaced by technology; at any rate, they
apparently hadn't covered the gravestone sculptor who wrote to me. But
what if they did cover him? "Okay, John, you're 45 years old and the craft
you've practiced all your life has just been rendered obsolete by Consolidated
Colossal Corporation's new laser-guided stonecutter. But smile and be
optimistic, because we're going to put you through a training program
to teach you how to operate a ball-bearing-polishing machine "Your

colleague may think this is consistent with human dignity, but I don't, and
I'm pretty sure the above-mentioned gravestone sculptor wouldn't think it
was consistent with human dignity either.

It's worth mentioning, by the way, that improved sanitation too seems
to have had unanticipated negative consequences. Sanitation no doubt is one
of the most important factors in the dramatic, worldwide reduction in infant
mortality rates, which presumably has played a major role in the population
explosion. In addition, improved sanitation may be responsible for allergies
and inflammatory bowel disease. There has been a "sharp increase" in allergies
over the past few decades, and it is hypothesized that modern sanitation is
responsible for this.'") The idea is that because we are too clean, children's
immune systems don't get enough "exercise," so to speak, and therefore
fail to develop properly. Though I can't cite the source, I've read something
similar about Crohn's disease, a form of infl ammatory bowel disease that was
virtually unknown until modern times. It is hypothesized that the disease
is caused by lack of exposure to intestinal parasites, and one experimental
treatment has been based on intentionally infecting patients with certain
intestinal worms. I don't know whether the latest research has confirmed
these hypotheses and I'm not in a position to dig up the relevant literature.

E. Your fourth example is "air and water pollution. "You claim that
the (partial) solution to this problem has been acceptable "as defined by
the majority."

1. Assuming for the sake of argument that the solution actually has
been acceptable to the majority, that means nothing. The great majority of
Germans supported Hitler "until the very end."

The majority's opinions about society's problems are to a great extent
irrational, for at least two reasons: (i) the majority's outlook is shaped, to a
considerable degree, by propaganda, (ii) Most people put very little serious
effort into thinking about society's problems. This is not an elitist sneer at the
"unthinking masses.'" The average man's refusal to think seriously about large-
scale problems is quite sensible: Such thought is useless to him personally
because he himself can't do anything to solve such problems. In fact, some
psychologists and physicians have advised people to avoid thinking about
problems that they are powerless to solve, because such thinking only causes
unnecessary stress and anxiety. It could be argued that people like us, who
put substantial time and effort into studying social problems while having
only a minimal chance of contributing measurably to the solutions, are
freaks. And our thinking may be influenced by propaganda more than we
realize or would like to admit.

The point is, however, that the majority's putative acceptance of existing
levels of air and water pollution is largely irrelevant.

2. And how do you know that existing levels of air and water pollution
are acceptable to the majority? Have you taken a survey? Maybe you simply
assume that existing levels of pollution are acceptable to the majority because
there currently is very little public agitation over pollution. Though the
meaning of the term "acceptable" is not at all clear in this context, it can by
no means be assumed that the level of active public resistance is an accurate
index of what the public feels is "acceptable." I think most historians would
agree that active, organized public resistance is most likely to occur not
necessarily when conditions are worst, but when people fi nd new hope that
resistance will bring success, or when some other new circumstance or event
prods them into action. So the absence of public resistance by no means
proves that the majority is satisfied.

3. What the system has done is to alleviate the most visible and
obvious signs of pollution, such as murky, stinking rivers and air darkened
by smog. Since these symptoms are directly experienced by the average
man, they presumably are the ones most likely to arouse public discontent;
and while their (partial) cure may inconvenience certain industries it does
not significantly impede the progress of the system as a whole. The most
successful industrialized countries, for the present, have easily enough
economic surplus to cover the cost of controlling the aforementioned visible
forms of pollution. But this may not be true of backward countries that are
struggling to catch up with the more advanced ones. For example, the air
pollution over Mexico City is notoriously horrible.

In fact, if you look beyond the comforting improvements in air-pollution
indices over our cities as reported by the EPA and consider the worldwide
pollution situation as a whole, it appears that what the system has done to
alleviate the problem is almost negligible. The following by the way goes also
to support the argument that things are bad and getting worse:

Acid rain (due to certain forms of air pollution) is still damaging our
forests. At least up to a few years ago (and perhaps even today) the Russians
were still dumping their nuclear waste in the Arctic Ocean. The public
(in the U.S.) has been warned not to eat too much fish, because fish are
contaminated with mercury and PCB's (from water pollution, obviously). For
the foregoing I can't cite a source; I'm depending on memory. But:

"The indigenous populations of Greenland and Arctic Canada are being
poisoned by toxic industrial chemicals that drift north by wind and water,
polluting their food supplies. On January 13, 2004, The Lis Angeles Times told
its readers that the pollutants, which include PCBs and 200 other hazardous
compounds, get into the native food chains through zooplankton. 'The bodies
of Arctic people... contain the highest human concentrations of industrial
chemicals and pesticides found anywhere on Earth — levels so extreme that
the breast milk and tissues of some Oreenlanders could be classified as
hazardous wastes,' the Times' Maria Cone reports."

"In the mid-1980s, some researchers in the northern Midwest, Canada,
and Scandinavia began reporting alarming concentrations of mercury in
freshwater fish. ...[T]he skies already hold so much mercury that even if
industrial emissions of the metal ended tomorrow, significant fallout of the
pollutant might persist for decades "tio-'

"Measurable levels of cancer-causing pesticides have been found in
the drinking water of 347 towns and cities. Creation and use of toxic
chemicals continues at a rate far faster than our capacity to learn how safe
extended exposures to these substances are. . . .The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency was mandated to test existing pesticides — just one class
of chemicals — for health risks by 1972, but the job still isn't completed today,
and regulators are falling further behind "

"The new residents [on grounds of former U.S. Clark Air Base, in the
Philippines] dug wells, planted crops... una ware that the ground water they
drank and bathed in, the soil their rice and sweet potatoes grew in, and
the creeks and ponds they fished in were contaminated by toxic substances
dumped during a half century of U.S. tenure. Within a few years, health
workers began tracking a rise in spontaneous abortions, stillbirths, and birth
defects; kidney, skin, and nervous disorders; cancers, and other conditions....
Today, the Pentagon acknowledges polluting major overseas bases, but insists
that the Unites States isn't obligated to clean them up."

(On the bright side: "Air-pollution emissions have dropped 7.8% since
2000 [what pollutants are measured, and where, is unstated] Critics say
the drop in water-quality complaints reflects laggard enforcement — "

Anyone who wanted to search the media could go on and on citing
things of this sort. And if what I've seen is any indication, he would find
vastly more on the negative than on the positive side.

Perhaps the biggest pollution problem of all is global warming,
which scientists now agree is due at least in part to human production of
"greenhouse gasses," carbon dioxide in particular. It's not just a matter
of temperatures rising a few degrees; the consequences of global warming
are extremely ;erious.They include the spread of disease) extreme
weather conditions such as storms, tornados, and floods, possible
extinction of arctic species such as the polar bear, disruption of the way
of life of arctic residents, rising sea levels that will flood parts of the
world, and drought. More of the Earth is turning to dust. It's a
creeping catastrophe', says a U.N. spokesman. Desertification's pace has
doubled since the 1970s — However, global warming is only one of the
causes of desertification.

Your colleague's proposed "general pattern" doesn't work here, because
you can't just turn something like global warming around when enough
people become concerned about it. No matter what measures are taken now,
we will be stuck with the consequences of global warming for (at least!) a
matter of centuries. In fact, some scientists fear that human modification
of the atmosphere may soon "throw a switch" that will trigger a dramatic,
disastrous, and irreversible change in the Earth's climate.

Since it is in the system's own interest to keep pollution and global
warming under control, it is conceivable that solutions maybe found that
will prevent these problems from becoming utterly disastrous. But what
will be the cost to human beings? In particular, what will be the cost to
human freedom and dignity, which so often get in the way of the system's
technical solutions?
