Up to the time when I entered Harvard University at the age of sixteen, I
used to dream of escaping from civilization and going to live in some wild
place. During the same period, my distaste for modern life grew as I became
increasingly aware that people in industrial society were reduced to the status
of gears in a machine, that they lacked f reedom and were at the mercy of the
large organizations that controlled the conditions under which they lived.

After I entered Harvard University I took some courses in anthropology,
which taught me more about primitive peoples and gave me an appetite to
acquire some of the knowledge that enabled them to live in the wild. For
example, I wished to have their knowledge of edible plants. But I had no idea
where to get such knowledge until a couple of years later, when I discovered
to my surprise that there were books about edible wild plants. The first
such book that I bought was Stalking the Wild Asparagus, by Euell Gibbons,
and af ter that when I was home from college and graduate school during
the summers, I went several times each week to the Cook County Forest
Preserves near Chicago to look for edible plants. At first it seemed eerie
and strange to go all alone into the forest, away from all roads and paths.
But as I came to know the forest and many of the plants and animals that
lived in it, the feeling of strangeness disappeared and I grew more and more
comfortable in the woodland. I also became more and more certain that I did
not want to spend my whole life in civilization, and that I wanted to go and
live in some wild place.

Meanwhile, I was doing well in mathematics. It was fun to solve
mathematical problems, but in a deeper sense mathematics was boring
and empty because for me it had no purpose. If I had worked on applied
mathematics I would have contributed to the development of the
technological society that I hated, so I worked only on pure mathematics.
But pure mathematics was only a game. I did not understand then, and I
still do not understand, why mathematicians are content to fritter away
their whole lives in a mere game. I myself was completely dissatisfied with
such a life.

I knew what I wanted: To go and live in some wild place. But I didn't
know how to do so. In those days there were no primitivist movements, no
survivalists, and anyone who left a promising career in mathematics to go live
among forests or mountains would have been regarded as foolish or crazy. I
did not know even one person who would have understood why I wanted to
do such a thing. So, deep in my heart, I felt convinced that I would never be
able to escape from civilization.

Because I found modern life absolutely unacceptable, I grew increasingly
hopeless until, at the age of 24, I arrived at a kind of crisis: I felt so miserable
that I didn't care whether I lived or died. But when I reached that point,
a sudden change took place: I realized that if I didn't care whether I lived
or died, then I didn't need to fear the consequences of anything I might
do. Therefore I could do anything I wanted. I was free! Ttiatwas the great
turning-point in my life because it was then that I acquired courage,
which has remained with me ever since. It was at that time, too, that I
became certain that I would soon go to live in the wild, no matter what the
consequences. I spent two years teaching at the University of California in
order to save some money, then I resigned my position and went to look for a
place to live in the forest.

I wrote for myjournal on August 14, 1983: "The fifth of August I began a
hike to the east. I got to my hidden camp that I have in a gulch beyond what
I call "Diagonal Gulch." I stayed there through the following day, August
6. I felt the peace of the forest there. But there are few huckleberries there,
and though there are deer, there is very little small game. Furthermore, it
had been a long time since I had seen the beautiful and isolated plateau
where the various branches of Trout Creek originate. So I decided to take
off for that area on the 7th of August. A little after crossing the roads in
the neighborhood of Crater Mountain I began to hear chain saws; the
sound seemed to be coming from the upper reaches of Rooster Bill Creek. I
assumed they were cutting trees; I didn't like it but I thought I would be able
to avoid such things when I got onto the plateau. Walking across the hillsides
on my way there, I saw down below me a new road that had not been there
previously, and that appeared to cross one of the ridges that close in Stemple
Creek. This made me feel a little sick. Nevertheless, I went on to the plateau.
What I found there broke my heart. The plateau was criss-crossed with new
roads, broad and well-made for roads of that kind. The plateau is ruined
forever. The only thing that could save it now would be the collapse of the
technological society. I couldn't bear it.lhat was the best and most beautiful
and isolated place around here and I have wonderful memories of it.

"One road passed within a couple of hundred feet of a lovely spot where
I camped for a long time a few years ago and passed many happy hours. Full
of grief and rage I went back and camped by South Fork Humbug Creek. . ."

The next day I started for my home cabin. My route took me past a
beautiful spot, a favorite place of mine where there was a spring of pure
water that could safely be drunk without boiling. I stopped and said a kind
of prayer to the spirit of the spring. It was a prayer in which I swore that I
would take revenge for what was being done to the forest.

My journal continues: "...and then I returned home as quickly as I
could because — I have something to do!" You can guess what it was that I
had to do.

The problem of civilization is identical with the problem of technology.
Let me first explain that when I speak of technology I do not refer only to
physical apparatus such as tools and machines. I include also techniques,
such as the techniques of chemistry, civil engineering, or biotechnology.
Included too are human techniques such as those of propaganda or of
educational psychology, as well as organizational techniques could not exist
at an advanced level without the physical apparatus — the tools, machines,
and structures — on which the whole technological system depends.

However, technology in the broader sense of the word includes not
only modern technology but also the techniques and physical apparatus
that existed at earlier stages of society. For example, plows, harness for
animals, blacksmith's tools, domesticated breeds of plants and animals, and
the techniques of agriculture, animal husbandry, and metalworking. Early
civilizations depended on these technologies, as well as on the human
and organizational techniques needed to govern large numbers of people.
Civilizations cannot exist without the technology on which they are based.

Conversely, where the technology is available civilization is likely to develop
sooner or later.

Thus, the problem of civilization can be equated with the problem of
technology. The farther back we can push technology, the farther back we
will push civilization. If we could push technology all the way back to the
stone age, there would be no more civilization.

In reference to my alleged actions you ask, "Don't you think violence is
violence?" Of course, violence is violence. And violence is also a necessary
part of nature. If predators did not kill members of prey species, then the
prey species would multiply to the point where they would destroy their
environment by consuming everything edible. Many kinds of animals are
violent even against members their own species. For example, chimpanzees
often kills other chimpanzees. In some regions, fights are common among
wild bears. The magazine Bears and Other Top Predators, Volume 1, Issue 2,
pages 28-29, shows a photograph of bears fi ghting and a photograph of a
bear wounded in a fight, and mentions that such wounds can be deadly. See
article "Sibling Desperado," Science News, Volume 163, February 15, 2003.

Human beings in the wild constitute one of the more violent species.
A good general survey of the cultures of hunting-andgathering peoples
is The Hunting Peoples, by Carleton S. Coon, published by Little, Brown
and Company, Boston and Toronto, 1971, and in this book you will find
numerous examples in hunting-and-gathering societies of violence by human
beings against other human beings. Professor Coon makes clear (pages XIX,
3,4,9, 10) that he admires hunting-and-gathering peoples and regards them
as more fortunate than civilized ones. But he is an honest man and does
not censor out those aspects of primitive life, such as violence, that appear
disagreeable to modern people. Thus, it is clear that a significant amount of
violence is a natural part of human life. There is nothing wrong with violence
in itself. In any particular case, whether violence is good or bad depends on
how it is used and the purpose for which it is used.

So why do modern people regard violence as evil in itself? They do so
for one reason only: They have been brainwashed by propaganda. Modern
society uses various forms of propaganda to teach people to be frightened
and horrified by violence because the technoindustrial system needs a
population that is timid, docile, and afraid to assert itself, a population that
will not make trouble or disrupt the orderly functioning of the system. Power
depends ultimately on physical force. By teaching people that violence is
wrong (except, of course, when the system itself uses violence via the police
or the military), the system maintains its monopoly on physical force and
thus keeps all power in its own hands.

Whatever philosophical or moral rationalizations people may invent to
explain their belief that violence is wrong, the real reason for that belief is
that they have unconsciously absorbed the system's propaganda.

All of the groups you mention here are part of a single movement. (Let's call
it the "GA [Green Anarchist] Movement.") Of course, these people are right
to the extent that they oppose civilization and the technology on which it
is based. But, because of the form in which this movement is developing, it
may actually help to protect the technoindustrial system and may serve as an
obstacle to revolution. I will explain:

It is difficult to suppress rebellion directly. When rebellion is put down
by force, it very of ten breaks out again later in some new form in which
the authorities find it more difficult to control. For example, in 1878 the
German Reichstag enacted harsh and repressive laws against the Social-
Democratic movement, as a result of which the movement was crushed and
its members were scattered, confused, and discouraged. But only for a short
time. The movement soon reunited itself, became more energetic, and found
new ways of spreading its ideas, so that by 1884 it was stronger than ever. G.
A. Zimmermann, Das Neunzehnte Jahrhundert, Zweite Hiilfte, Zweiter Teil,
Druck und Verlag von Geo. Brumder, Milwaukee, 1902, page 23.

Thus, astute observers of human affairs know that the powerful classes
of a society can most effectively defend themselves against rebellion by using
force and direct repression only to a limited extent, and relying mainly on
manipulation to deflect rebellion. One of the most effective devices used
is that of providing channels through which rebellious impulses can be
expressed in ways that are harmless to the system. For example, it is well
known that in the Soviet Union the satirical magazine Krtkodil was designed
to provide an outlet for complaints and for resentment of the authorities
in a way that would lead no one to question the legitimacy of the Soviet
system or rebel against it in any serious way. But the "democratic" system of
the West has evolved mechanisms for deflecting rebellion that are far more
sophisticated and effective than any that existed in the Soviet Union. It is a
truly remarkable fact that in modern Western society people "rebel" in favor
of the values of the very system against which they imagine themselves to
be rebelling. The left "rebels" in favor of racial and religious equality, equality
for women and homosexuals, humane treatment of animals, and so forth.
But these are the values that the American mass media teach us over and
over again every day. Leftists have been so thoroughly brainwashed by media
propaganda that they are able to "rebel" only in terms of these values, which
are values of the technoindustrial system itself. I n this way the system has
successfully deflected the rebellious impulses of the left into channels that
are harmless to the system.

Rebellion against technology and civilization is real rebellion, a real
attack on the values of the existing system. But the green anarchists,
anarcho-primitivists, and so forth (the "GA Movement") have fallen under
such heavy influence from the left that their rebellion against civilization has
to a great extent been neutralized. Instead of rebelling against the values of
civilization, they have adopted many civilized values themselves and have
constructed an imaginary picture of primitive societies that embodies these
civilized values.

I don't mean to say that the hunting-and-gathering way of life was no better
than modern life. On the contrary, I believe it was better beyond comparison.
Many, perhaps most investigators who have studied hunter-gatherers have
expressed their respect, their admiration, or even their envy of them.

But obviously the reasons why primitive life was better than civilized
life had nothing to do with gender equality, kindness to animals, non-
competitiveness, or nonviolence. Those values are the soft values of modern
civilization. By projecting those values onto hunting-and-gathering
societies, the GA Movement has created a myth of a primitive Utopia that
never existed in reality. Thus, even though the GA Movement claims to
reject civilization and modernity, it remains enslaved to some of the most
important values of modern society. For this reason, the GA Movement
cannot be an effective revolutionary movement.

In the first place, part of the GA Movement's energy is deflected away
from the real revolutionary objective — to eliminate modern technology and
civilization in general — in favor of the pseudo-revolutionary issues of racism,
sexism, animal rights, homosexual rights, and so forth. In the second place,
because of its commitment to these pseudo-revolutionary issues, the GA
Movement may attract too many leftists — people who are less interested in
getting rid of modern civilization than they are in the leftist issues of racism,
sexism, etc. This would cause a further defl ection of the movement's energy
away from the issues of technology and civilization. In the third place, the
objective of securing the rights of women, homosexuals, animals, and so
forth, is incompatible with the objective of eliminating civilization, because
women and homosexuals in primitive societies often do not have equality,
and such societies are usually cruel to animals. If one's goal is to secure
the rights of these groups, then one's best policy is to stick with modern
civilization. In the fourth place, the GA Movement's adoption of many of
the sof t values of modern civilization , as well as its myth of a soft primitive
Utopia, attracts too many soft, dreamy, lazy, impractical people who are more
inclined to retreat into Utopian fantasies than to take eff ective, realistic action
to get rid of the technoindustrial system.

The GA Movement may be not only useless, but worse than
useless, because it may be an obstacle to the development of an effective
revolutionary movement. Since opposition to technology and civilization
is an important part of the GA Movement's program, young people who
are concerned about what technological civilization is doing to the world
are drawn into that movement. Certainly not all of these young people are
leftists or sof t, dreamy, ineff ectual types; some of them have the potential to
become real revolutionaries. But in the GA Movement they are outnumbered
by leftists and other useless people, so they are neutralized, they become
corrupted, and their revolutionary potential is wasted. In this sense, the GA
Movement could be called a destroyer of potential revolutionaries.

It will be necessary to build a new revolutionary movement that
will keep itself strictly separate from the GA Movement and its soft,
civilized values. I don't mean that there is anything wrong with gender
equality, kindness to animals, tolerance of homosexuality, or the like. But
these values have no relevance to the effort to eliminate technological
civilization. They are not revolutionary values. An effective revolutionary
movement will have to adopt instead the hard values of primitive societies,
such as skill, self-discipline, honesty, physical and mental stamina,
intolerance of externally-imposed restraints, capacity to endure physical
pain, and, above all, courage. 

First point (freedom). . . I and some other people place an extremely high
value on freedom; and I do so because today there is an acute shortage of
freedom as I've defined it. If I had grown up in a society in which there was
an abundance of freedom but an acute shortage of (for example) physical
necessities, I might well have been willing to sacrifice some of my freedom
for physical necessities. Poncins says that the Eskimos he knew considered
it a reward and not a punishment to be imprisoned, because in prison they
were fed and kept warm without having to exert themselves.

Second point (autonomy/freedom). ...I wouldn't say flatly that medieval
peasants (for example) had more freedom than we have today, but I think one
could make a strong argument that they did have more of the kind of freedom
that really counts. See my letters to J. N. (in the Labadie Collection).

Third point (surrogate activities). I've never said that surrogate activities
"must be abandoned." Also, the line between surrogate activities and
purposeful activities often is not easy to draw. See ISAIF, §§40, 84, 90. And
surrogate activities are not peculiar to modern society. What is true is that
surrogate activities have come to play an unusual, disproportionate, and
exaggerated role in modern society. ...In any case, I don't see that anything
would be accomplished by attacking surrogate activities. But I think that
the concept of surrogate activity is important for an understanding of the
psychology of modern man.

Fourth point (revolution). ...In the present historical context a successful
revolution would consist in bringing about the complete dissolution of the
technoindustrial system.

Fifth point (reform). Essentially I agree with this, though I wouldn't
express it in exactly the same words.

Sixth point (revolution is demanded). Yes, revolution is demanded. I've
never said, and I certainly do not believe, that a revolutionary movement
must be peaceful and nonviolent. I have simply declined to discuss the
violent aspects of revolution, because I don't want to give the authorities
an excuse to cut off my communications with you on the ground that I'm
"inciting violence." I do think that a revolutionary movement should have
one branch that will avoid all violent or otherwise illegal activities in order
to be able to function openly and publicly. I've never said that a revolution
should be led by a "small group," which to me would mean 10, 20, 50, or at
most 100 people. (The "Handful" of people I referred to in an earlier letter
would be initiators, probably would not retain leadership permanently.)
I do think that the active and effective part of a revolutionary movement
would comprise only a small fraction of the entire population. Finally, I've
never said that the revolution should be led by intellectuals. Of course, that
would depend on what one means by an "intellectual." I suppose that term
is most commonly taken to include college and university faculty in the
humanities and social sciences, and persons in closely related occupations,
such as professional writers who write on serious subjects. When the word
"intellectual" is understood in that sense, it is my impression that very, very
few if any present-day intellectuals are potential members of a revolutionary
movement. I can imagine that some intellectuals could play a very important
role in formulating, articulating, and disseminating ideas that would
subsequently form part of the basis for a revolutionary movement. But in
reading The New York Review, The London Review, and The Times Literary
Supplement over the last several years I've found virtually no mention of the
technology problem. It's as if the intellectuals were willfully avoiding what is
obviously the most critical issue of our time. That's why I'm so pleased to find
at least two intellectuals — yourself and your unnamed colleague — who take
a serious interest in the technology problem.

Seventh point (avoidance of stress-reduction). . . I decidedly disagree
with your sentence, which says: "In fact, [revolutionaries] should actively

OPPOSE such actions "Absolutely not! Let's take minority rights, for
example. The big problem there is that the fuss over minority rights absorbs
the rebellious energies of would-be radicals and distracts attention from
the critical issue of technology. By opposing equal rights for non-whites,
women, homosexuals, etc., revolutionaries would merely intensify the fuss
over minority rights and thus distract even more attention from the issue
of technology. What revolutionaries have to do is show people that the fuss
over minority rights is largely irrelevant.

Further, the principle that revolutionaries should work to increase the
tensions in society is merely a general rule of thumb, not a rigid law that
can be applied mechanically. One has to give separate consideration to
each individual case. Are the social tensions arising from discrimination
against minorities useful from a revolutionary point of view? Clearly not!

For example, if black people are harassed by police, then their attention will
be focused on that problem and they will have no time for the technology
problem. Thus, again, problems of minority rights distract attention from the
technology problem, and we would be better off if all minority problems had
already been solved, because the associated tensions are not productive. See
ISAIF, §§190-92.

For another example, suppose revolutionaries were to oppose political
action designed to reduce pollution. In that case people concerned about
pollution would become hostile toward the revolutionaries. Further, tension
between opponents of pollution and the system would be reduced, because
opponents of pollution would attribute continued pollution in part to the
obstructive behavior of the revolutionaries. They would say, "The problem is
those damned extremists! If it weren't for them, we would be able to swing
the system around and reduce pollution." So, instead of opposing reformist
efforts to reduce pollution, revolutionaries have to emphasize: (i) that such
efforts can never really solve the pollution problem, but only alleviate it
to a limited extent; (ii) that pollution is only one of many grave problems
associated with the technoindustrial system; and (iii) that it is futile to try to
attack all of these problems separately and individually — the only effective
solution is to bring down the whole system.

The tensions that are useful are the tensions that pit people against the
technoindustrial system. Other tensions — e.g, racial tensions, which pit
different racial groups against each other rather than against the system — are
counterproductive and actually relieve the tension against the system, because
they serve as a distraction. See ISAIF, §§190-92.

On page 4 you write that "we should seek optimum levels of technology
and social order." Several other people who have written to me have raised
similar questions about an optimal or acceptable level of technology. My
position is that we have only two choices. It's like flipping a light-switch.
Either your light is on or your light is off, and there's nothing more to be
said. Similarly, with only minor reservations and qualifications, we have
only two choices at the present point in history: We can either allow the
technoindustrial system to continue on its present course, or we can destroy
the technoindustrial system. In the first case, technology will eventually
swallow everything. In the second case, technology will find its own level as
determined by circumstances over which we have no control. Consequently,
it is idle to speak of finding an "optimal" level of technology. Any conclusion
we might reach about an "optimal" level of technology would be useless,
because we would have no means of applying that conclusion in the real
world. The same is true of any "optimal" level of social order.

I've read the pieces by Jacques Ellul and Ivan Illich that you sent me.
Illich wrote: "If within the very near future man cannot set limits to the
interference of his tools with the environment and practice effective birth
control, the next generations will experience the gruesome apocalypse
predicted by many ecologists." Illich wrote that 32 years ago, and the
"apocalypse" is not yet upon us. I think it's safe to say that the system will
break down eventually — if only because every previous civilization has broken
down eventually — and the breakdown when it comes will no doubt be
gruesome, butl see no reason to believe that the system is now on the brink
of collapse. Dire predictions made by "ecologists" 30-odd years ago have
proved to be exaggerated and/or premature.

To me, a lot of what Illich writes is completely incomprehensible. E.g.,
on page 9 he says: "When business is normal the procedural opposition
between corporations and clients usually heightens the legitimacy of the
latter's dependence." Can you explain what this sentence means? I find it
hopelessly obscure.

As for Ellul, "Anarchy from a Christian Standpoint, 1. What is
Anarchy?," I think he's all wrong. It would take too much time to discuss
all the ways in which I think he's wrong, so I'll just mention a couple of
points. First, he's wrong in claiming that, in history, violence has proven to
be an ineffective tactic. Actually violence has been effective or ineffective,
depending on the historical circumstances of each particular case. See
James F. Kirkham, Sheldon G. Levy, and William J. Crotty, Assassination
and Political Violence: A Report to the National Commission on the Causes
and Prevention oJ'Violence, Praeger Publishers, New York, 1970, page 4.
The authors concluded that, in history, systematic assassination had been
"effective in achieving the long-range goals sought, although not so in
advancing the short-term goals or careers of the terrorists themselves." On
this subject the authors go farther than I would.

Second, Ellul writes: "[The] two great characteristics [of people], no
matter what their society or education, are covetousness and a desire for
power. We find these traits always and everywhere." It's not completely clear
to me what Ellul means by "covetousness. "But he writes that covetousness
"can never be assuaged or satisfied, for once one thing is acquired it directs
its attention to something else." So Ellul evidently has in mind a desire to
accumulate property indefinitely. If my interpretation of his meaning is
correct, then Ellul is dead wrong about covetousness.lhere have been many
societies in which the desire to accumulate property has been absent. E.g.,
most if not all nomadic hunting-and-gathering societies. To take a concrete
case, the Mbuti pygmies: According to Schebesta, "No urge for possession. . .
seems to dwell in them"; "there is also the fact that among the Mbuti, any
intention to pile up supplies, or at all to accumulate wealth, is lacking."

The need for power undoubtedly is universal, but it does not have
to take the form of a desire to dominate other people, as Ellul seems to
assume. It may well be true that an impulse to dominance is innate in
humans, especially in males, but I think Ellul greatly overestimates its
strength. Moreover, there have existed societies in which any impulse to
dominance has been kept well under control: Among the Mbuti, and among
the Bushmen studied by Richard Lee, no one was allowed to set himself
up above the rest. Thus, these societies came surprisingly close to the
anarchist ideal.

I. WHY REFORM WILL FAIL

You and your colleague make a series of related assertions: We "would
act... to restrict technology as it becomes necessary." "People in the future
will likely act to mitigate technological advances or effects that begin to
significantly undermine their wellbeing." Success in "adequately overcoming
technologically-induced adversities" will be more likely through reform than
through revolution. There's a "general pattern: A technical problem arises and
... [eventually] ... a compromise solution is implemented that reduces the
level of harm to 'a generally acceptable level.'"

In my letter of 11/23/04, I answered these claims in part. Addressing
your four examples of the purported "general pattern," I argued that even
assuming that the achieved solutions to the problems were adequate
ones (which in three of the four cases was debatable at best): (i) The
"solutions" came about largely through the operation of "objective" factors
and independently of human will, (ii) In two of the four cases (political
oppression, slavery) the solutions were reached, in important part, through
warfare and violent revolution, hence could not fairly be characterized
as reform, (iii) In the same two of the four cases, the solutions were not
reached until thousands of years after the problems arose. In other words, the
solutions did not happen when we needed them, but when the "objective"
conditions were by chance right for them.

I .A. The most important point in the foregoing is:
l.lhc course of history, in the large, is generally determined not by
human choice but by "objective" factors, especially by the kind of "natural
selection" that I discussed in my letter of 10/12/04. Consequently, we can't
achieve a long-lasting solution to a major social problem by superficial
tinkering designed merely to correct particular symptoms. If a solution
is possible at all, it can be reached only by finding a way to change the
underlying "objective" factors that are responsible for the existing situation.

There are several other reasons why acceptable solutions to the
problems of the technological society will not be reached through the "general
pattern" of compromise and ref orm that you and your colleague propose.

2. Generally speaking, reform is possible only in cases where the
interests of the system coincide with the interests of human beings. Where
the interests of the system confl ict with those of human beings, there is
no meaningful reforming E.g., sanitation has improved because it is in
the system's interest to avoid epidemics. But nothing has been done about
the unsatisfactory nature of modern work, because if most people worked
as independent artisans rather than as cogs in the system, the economic
efficiency of the system would be drastically impaired.

"Natural selection" is at work here: Systems that compromise their own
power and efficiency for the sake of "human values" are at a competitive
disadvantage vis-a-vis systems that put power and efficiency first. Hence, the
latter expand while the former fall behind.

3. You claim that people will act to mitigate problems "that begin to
significantly undermine their well-being." But often, once a problem begins
to significantly undermine people's well-being, it is too late to solve the
problem; or even if the problem can be solved the cost of solving it may be
unacceptably high.

For example, it is too late to solve the problem of the Greenhouse
Effect (global warming). Whatever is done now, we will be stuck with its
consequences for centuries to come. We can hope to "solve" the problem only
to the extent of keeping the effect within certain limits, and it's not clear that
even that much can be done without drastic cuts in energy consumption that
will have unacceptable economic consequences.

Apparently the threat represented by nuclear weapons has not
undermined people's well-being enough to lead to the abolition of these
weapons. If there is ever a major nuclear war, people's well-being will be
undermined very dramatically; but then it will be too late.

Right now biotechnicians are playing with fire. The escape from the
laboratory of some artificially-created organisms or genetic material could
have disastrous consequences, yet nothing is being done to restrain the
biotechnicians. If there is ever a major biological disaster, people's well-
being will indeed be undermined, but then it will be too late to correct
the problem. For example, the so-called "killer bees" are a hybrid of
South American and African bees that escaped from a research facility
somewhere in South America. Once the bees had escaped, all efforts to
stop them proved futile. They have spread over much of South America and
into the U.S. and have killed hundreds of people. With the experimentation
in biotechnology that is now going on, something much, much worse could
happen. See Bill Joy's article.

4. Often a bad thing cannot be fixed because its specific cause is not
known. Consider for example the steady increase in the rate of mental
disorders that I discussed in my letter of 11/23/04. It seems almost certain
that this increase is in some way an outgrowth of technological progress,
since the entire lifestyle of modern man is essentially determined by his
technology. But no one knows specifically why the rate of mental disorders
has been increasing. My personal opinion is that the high rate of depression
has a great deal to do with deprivation with respect to the power process,
but even if I'm right that still leaves a great deal unanswered, e.g., in regard
to mania and anxiety disorders.

Again, it is believed that the rate of mortality due to cancer has increased
by a factor of more than ten since the late 19th century, and that this is
not a result merely of the aging of the population. This too is almost certainly
in some way an outcome of the technoindustrial lifestyle, but, while some
causes of cancer are known, the reason for the overall massive increase in the
incidence of this disease is still a mystery.

5. Even where a problem can be solved, the solution itself often is
offensive to human dignity. For example, because the causes of depression,
mania and attention-deficit disorder either are unknown or cannot be
removed without excessive cost to the system, these problems are "solved"
by giving the patients drugs. So the system makes people sick by subjecting
them to conditions that are not fit for human beings to live in, and then
it restores their ability to function by feeding them drugs. To me, this is a
colossal insult to human dignity.

6. Where a problem is of long standing, people may fail to realize even
that there is a problem, because they have never known anything better.
I've already suggested something like this in regard to stress. See my letter
of 5/19/04.

7. Some problems are insoluble because of the very nature of modern
technology. For example, the transfer of power from individuals and small
groups to large organizations is inevitable in a technological society for
several reasons, one of which is that many essential operations in the
functioning of the technological system can be carried out only by large
organizations. E.g., if petroleum were not refined on a large scale, the
production of gasoline would be so costly and laborious that the automobile
would not be a practical means of transportation.

8. Your formulations, as quoted on the first page of this letter, rely on
such terms as "well-being," "adversities," and "generally acceptable level"
of "harm."These terms may be subject to a variety of interpretations, but I
assume that what you mean is that when conditions make people sufficiently
uncomfortable they will act to reduce their discomfort to an acceptable level.
I deny that this is consistently true, but even if it were true it would not solve
the problem as I see it.

One of the most dangerous features of the technoindustrial system
is precisely its power to make people comfortable (or at least reduce their
discomfort to a relatively acceptable level) in circumstances under which
they should ntt be comfortable, e.g., circumstances that are offensive
to human dignity, or destructive of the life that evolved on Earth over
hundreds of millions of years, or that may lead to disaster at some future
time. Drugs (as I've just discussed, I. A. 5) can alleviate the discomfort of
depression and attention-deficit disorder, propaganda can reconcile the
majority to environmental destruction, and the entertainment industry
gives people forgetfulness so that they won't worry too much about nuclear
weapons or about the fact that they may be replaced by computers a few
decades from now.

So comfort is not the main issue. On the contrary, one of our most
important worries should be that people may be made comfortable with
almost anything, including conditions that we would consider horrifying.
Perhaps you've read Aldous Huxley's Brave New World, a vision of a society
in which nearly everyone was supremely comfortable; yet Huxley intended
this vision to repel the reader, as being inconsistent with human dignity.

9. What happens is that social norms, and people themselves, change
progressively over time in response to changes in society. This occurs partly
through a spontaneous process of adaptation and partly through the agency
of propaganda and educational techniques; in the future, biotechnology too
may alter human beings. The result is that people come to accept conditions
that earlier generations would have considered inconsistent with freedom or
intolerably offensive to human dignity.

For example, failure or inability to retaliate for an injury was traditionally
seen as intensely shameful. To the ancient Romans, it was "the lowest depth
of shame to submit tamely to wrongs." To the 17th-century Spanish
playwright Calderon de la Barca, a man who had been subjected to a wrong
was degraded but could perhaps redeem himself by seeking revenge. Hie
same attitude — that to be wronged is a shame that can be wiped away only
through revenge persists today in the Middle East. In the English-
speaking world, even into the early 19th century, duels were fought over
points of "honor." (We all know about the famous duel in which Aaron Burr
killed Alexander Hamilton, and my recollection is that Andrew Jackson,
before he became President, killed a man in a duel.)

Today, however, "revenge" is a bad word. Dueling and private retaliation
not only are illegal, but by well-socialized people are seen as immoral. We
are expected to submit meekly to an injury or humiliation unless a legal
remedy is available through the courts. Of course, it's easy to see why modern
society's need for social order makes it imperative to suppress dueling and
private revenge.

Prior to the advent of the Industrial Revolution in England and
America, police forces were intentionally kept weak because people saw
police as a threat to their freedom. People relied for protection not primarily
on the police but on themselves, their families and their friends. Effective law
enforcement came to be regarded as desirable only as a result of the social
changes that the Industrial Revolution brought Today, needless to say,
hardly any respectable middle-class person sees the presence of strong police
forces as an infringement of his freedom.

I'm not trying to persuade you to advocate the abolition of police or to
approve of dueling and private revenge. My point is simply that attitudes
regarding what is consistent with human dignity and freedom have changed
in the past in response to the needs of the system, and will continue to
change in the future, also in response to the needs of the system. Thus, even if
future generations are able to "solve" social problems to the extent necessary
to secure what they conceive of as human dignity and freedom, their solutions
may be totally incompatible with what we would want for our posterity.

10. When a problem persists for a long time without substantial progress
toward a solution, most people just give up and become passive with respect
to it. (Note the connection with "learned helplessness.") This of course is
one of the mechanisms that help bring people to accept what they formerly
regarded as intolerable indignities as I described above.

For example, back in the late '50s or early '60s, Vance Packard published
a book titled The Hidden Persuaders, which was an expose of the manipulative
techniques that advertisers used to sell products or political candidates
to consumers or voters. When the book first appeared it received a great
deal of attention, and my recollection is that the most common reaction
among intellectuals and other thinking people was: "Isn't this scandalous?
What is the world coming to when people's attitudes, voting choices, and
buying habits can be manipulated by a handful of skilled professional
propagandists?" At that time I was in my late teens and was naive enough
to believe that, as a result of Packard's book and the attention it received,
something would be done about manipulative advertising. Obviously
nothing was done about it, and nowadays if anyone published a book about
manipulative advertising it wouldn't get much attention. The reaction of most
well-informed people would be: "Yeah, sure, we know all that. It's too bad...
but what can you do?"They would then drop the unpleasant subject and talk
or think about something else.lhey have lapsed into passive resignation.

Of course, nothing could be done about manipulative advertising
because it would have cost the system too much to do anything about it.
However insulting it may be to human dignity, the system needs propaganda,
and as always happens when the needs of the system come into conflict with
human dignity, the system's needs take precedence. (See I. A. 2 above.)

11. There is the "problem of the commons": It may be to everyone's
advantage that everyone should take a certain course of action, yet it
may be to the advantage of each particular individual to take the opposite
course of action. For example, in modern society, it is to everyone's
advantage that everyone should pay a portion of his income to support
the functions of government, but it is to the advantage of each particular
individual to keep all of his income for himself. (That's why payment of
taxes has to be compulsory.)

Similarly, I know people who think the technological society is horrible,
that the automobile is a curse, and that we would all be better off if no one
used modern technology. Yet they drive cars themselves and use all the
usual technological conveniences. And why shouldn't they? If individual
X refuses to drive a car, the technological system will go on as bef ore; X's
refusal to drive a car will accomplish nothing and will cost him a great deal
of inconvenience. For the same reason, X in most cases will not participate
in an effort to form a movement designed to remedy some problem of the
technological society, because his participation would cost him time and
energy, and there is at most a minimal chance that his own personal effort
would make the difference between success and failure for the movement.
People take action on social problems, even the most important ones, only
under special circumstances. See my letter of 11/23/04, Note 101.

12. Most people, most of the time, are not particularly foresighted, and
take little account of social dangers that lie decades in the future. As a result,
preventive measures commonly are postponed until it is too late.

If I remember correctly, the Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius
predicted the Greenhouse Effect way back in the 19th century; certainly
it was predicted at least as early as the 1960s. Yet no one tried to do
anything about it until recently, when it was already too late to avoid
many of its consequences.

The problem of the disposal of nuclear waste was obvious as soon as
the first nuclear power-plants were set up decades ago. No one knew of a
safe way to dispose of the waste, but it was simply assumed that a solution
to the problem would eventually be found and the development of nuclear
power-generation was pushed ahead. Worse still, nuclear power-generation
was intentionally introduced to third-world countries under the "Atoms for
Peace" program without any apparent consideration of the obvious question
whether their often irresponsible little governments would dispose of the
wastes safely or whether they would use their nuclear capacity for the
development of weapons.

Today, in this country, nuclear wastes are still piling up, and there is every
reason to think that they will keep piling up indefinitely. And there is still
no generally accepted solution to the problem of disposing of these wastes,
which will remain dangerous for many thousands of years. It is claimed that
the disposal site at Yucca Mountain in Nevada is safe, but this is widely
disputed. Experience has shown again and again that technological solutions,
excepting only the most minor innovations, need to be tested before they can
be relied on. Usually they work only after they have been corrected through
trial and error. The Nevada disposal site is an experiment the result of which
won't be known for thousands of years — when it will be too late. Simply on
the basis of the demonstrated unreliability of untested technological solutions,
I would guess it's more likely than not that the Nevada disposal site will
prove a failure.

Of course, most people would rather stick future generations with the
difficult and perhaps insoluble problem of dealing with our nuclear waste,
than accept any substantial reduction in the availability of electricity now.

If the nuclear waste problem in the U.S. is worrisome, you can imagine
how some of these irresponsible little third-world countries are disposing
of their nuclear waste. Not to mention the fact that some of them have
made or are trying to make nuclear bombs. So much for the foresight of
the presumably intelligent people who promoted nuclear power-generation
several decades ago.

13. The threatening aspects of technology often are balanced by
temptingly attractive features. And once people have given in to the
temptation of accepting an attractive but dangerous technological innovation,
there is no turning back — short of a breakdown of technological civilization.
See ISAIF §129. Biotechnology can increase agricultural production and
provide new medicines; in the future it will probably help to eliminate
genetic diseases and allow parents to give their children desired traits. As
computers grow faster and more sophisticated, they give people more and
more powers that they would not otherwise have. The latest electronic
entertainment media give people new and exciting kicks.

Your claim that people will correct problems when these make them
sufficiently uncomfortable, even if it were true, would have no clear
application to such cases. Technical innovations make people comfortable
in some ways and uncomfortable in other ways, and while the comforts are
obvious and direct, the discomforts often are indirect and not obvious. It
may be difficult or impossible even to recognize and prove the connection
between the technology and the discomfort.

E.g., people directly experience the fun that they get from computers
and electronic entertainment media, but it is by no means obvious that
exposure of children to computers and electronic media may cause attention-
deficit disorder. Some research suggests such an effect, but it remains an
open question whether the effect is real. As for the possibility of correcting
this problem through reform — let's watch your eff orts to curtail the use of
computers in the schools. If you have any great success even locally, I think
you will be doing very well indeed. And I predict with 99.9% certainty that
you will not succeed in curtailing the use of computers in the schools on a
nationwide basis.

14. Most people, most of the time, follow the path of least resistance,
lhat is, they do what will make them comfortable for the present and the
near future. This tendency deters people from addressing the underlying
causes of the discomforts of modern life.

The underlying problems are difficult to attack and can be corrected only
at a certain price, so most people take the easy way out and utilize one of the
avenues of escape that offer them quick alleviation of their discomfort. For
those who are not satisfied simply with immersion in the pleasures provided
by the entertainment industry, there are surrogate activities and there are
religions, as well as ideologies that serve psychological needs in the same way
that religions do. For many who suffer from a sense of powerlessness, it will
be more eff ective to strive for a position of power within the system than to
try to change the system. And for those who do struggle against the system,
it will be easier and more rewarding to concentrate on one or a few limited
issues in regard to which there is a reasonable chance of victory than to
address the intractable problems that are the real sources of their discontent.

Consider for example the kook variety of Christianity that has become
a serious political force in recent years. I'm referring to people who believe
that the world will end within 40 years and that sort of thing (see enclosed
article by Bill Moyers). It seems fairly obvious that these people retreat
into their fantasy world in order to escape from the anxieties and frustrations
of modern life. Who needs to worry about nuclear war or about the
environment when the world will end soon anyway, and all the true believers
will go to heaven? For those who are disturbed by the decay of traditional
morality, it is much easier to fight abortion and gay marriage than to
recognize that rapid technological change necessarily leads to rapid changes
in social values. See ISAIF §50. In ISAIF §§219-222 and in "The System's
Neatest Trick," I argued that the "causes" to which leftists devote themselves
similarly represent a form of escapism.

Through recourse to these various forms of escapism, people avoid the
need to address the real sources of their discontent.

15. Technological progress brings too many problems too rapidly.
Even if we make the extremely optimistic assumption that any one of the
problems could be solved through reform, it is unrealistic to suppose that all
of the most important problems can be solved through reform, and solved
in time. Here is a partial list of problems: War (with modern weapons, not
comparable to earlier warfare), nuclear weapons, accumulation of nuclear
waste, other pollution problems of many different kinds, global warming,
ozone depletion, exhaustion of some natural resources, overpopulation and
crowding, genetic deterioration of humans due to relaxation of natural
selection, abnormally high rate of extinction of species, risk of disaster from
biotechnological tinkering, possible or probable replacement of humans

by intelligent machines, biological engineering of humans (an insult to
human dignity), dominance of large organizations and powerlessness of
individuals, surveillance technology that makes individuals still more subject
to the power of large organizations, propaganda and other manipulative
psychological techniques, psychoactive medications, mental problems
of modern life, including, inter alia, stress, depression, mania, anxiety
disorders, attention-deficit disorder, addictive disorders, domestic abuse,
and generalized incompetence. If you want more, see the enclosed review of
books by Jared Diamond and Richard Posner.

The solution of any one of the foregoing problems (if possible at all)
would require a long and difficult struggle. If your colleague thinks that all of
these problems can be solved, and solved in time, by attacking each problem
separately, then he's dreaming. The only way out is to attack the underlying
source of all these problems, which is the technoindustrial system itself.

16. In a complex, highly-organized system like modern industrial society,
you can't change just one thing. Everything is connected to everything else,
and you can't make a major change in any one thing without changing
the whole system. This applies not only to the physical components of the
system, but to the whole mind-set, the whole system of values and priorities
that characterizes the technological society.

If you try to fix things by addressing each problem separately, your
reforms can't go far enough to fix anyone of the problems, because if you
make changes that are far-reaching enough to fix problem X, those changes
will have unacceptable consequences in other parts of the system. As pointed
out in ISAIF §§121-24, you can't get rid of the bad parts of technology and
still retain the good parts.

Consider for example the problem of manipulative advertising and
propaganda in general. Any serious restriction on manipulative advertising
would entail interference with the advertisers' First Amendment right
to free expression, so a radical restructuring of our First Amendment
jurisprudence would be required. The news media are supported by
advertising. If there were a drastic decline in advertising, who would
support the vast network that collects information around the world
and funnels it to the TV-viewer and the newspaper-reader? Maybe the
government would support it, but then the government could control the
news we receive, and you know what that implies.

Even more important, with an end to manipulative advertising there
would probably be a major drop in consumption, so the economy would go
to hell. You can imagine the consequences of that as well as I can.

Since the problems can't be solved one at a time, you have to think in
terms of changing the entire system, including the whole mind-set and
system of values associated with it.

17. What you ask for has no precedent in history. Societies sometimes
fix problems of relatively limited scope; e.g., a country that has sufF ered a
military defeat may be able to reorganize its army on new principles and win
the next battle. But historically, short of a radical transformation of the entire
social fabric (i.e., revolution), it has proved impossible for societies to solve
deep-lying problems of the kind we face today. I challenge you and your
colleague to produce even one example from history of a society that has
solved through piecemeal reform problems of the number and seriousness of
those that I've listed above (see I. A. 15).

If, in spite of the foregoing, you still think that reform will work, just
look at our past record. To take only a few of the most conspicuous examples:

1. Environmental destruction. People damaged their environment to some
degree even at the hunting-and-gathering stage. Forests were burned, either
through recklessness or because burned-over lands produced more food for
hunter-gatherers. Early hunters may have exterminated some species
of large game. As technology increased man's power, environmental
destruction became more serious. For example, it is well known that the
Mediterranean region was largely deforested by pre-modern civilizations.
But forests are only one part of the picture: Preindustrial societies had no
radioactive waste, no chemical factories, no diesel engines, and the damage
they did to their environment was minor in comparison with what is being
done today. In spite of the feeble palliative measures that are now being
taken, the overall picture is clear: For thousands of years, the damage that
humans have done to their environment has been steadily increasing. As for
reform — there is an environmental movement, but its successes have been
very modest in relation to the magnitude of the problem.

2. War. War existed among nomadic hunter-gatherers, and could be
nasty. But as civilization and military technology advanced, war became
more and more destructive. By the 20th century it was simply horrible. As
Winston Churchill put it: "War, which once was glorious and cruel, has
now become sordid and cruel." Private efforts to end war began at least as
early as the 1790s, and efforts by governments began at least as early as
the end of World War I with the League of Nations. You can see how little
has been accomplished.

3. Psychological problems incident to modern life. I discussed these in my
letter of 1 1/23/04. But the presence of such problems was already evident
early in the 20th century in the neurotic tendency of the arts. In reading a
history of Spanish literature recently, I was struck by the way the neurotic
made its appearance as the historian moved from the 19th to the 20th
century. E.g.: '"The poetry of Damaso Alonso [born in 1898]... is a cry...
of anguish and anger; an explosion of impotent rage against his own misery
and against the pain »f the world around him." Artists of this type can't
be dismissed simply as individuals with psychological problems peculiar to
themselves, because the fact that their work has been accepted and admired
among intellectuals is an indication that the neurosis is fairly widespread.

And what has been done about the psychological problems of
modern times? Drugs, psychotherapy — in my view insults to human
dignity. Where is the reform movement that, according to your theory, is
supposed to fix things?

4. Propaganda. As I mentioned above (see I. A. 10), the problem of
propaganda was well publicized by Vance Packard ca 1960, and the problem
was certainly recognized by others (e.g., Harold Lasswell) long before that.
And what has been done to correct this insult to human dignity? Nothing
whatsoever.

5. Domination of our lives by large organizations. This is a matter of
fundamental importance, and nothing effective has been done to alleviate
the problem. As I've pointed out (see I. A. 7), nothing can be done about this
problem in the context of a technological society.

6. Nuclear weapons. This is perhaps the star exhibit. Of all our
technologically induced problems the problem of nuclear weapons should be
the easiest to solve through reform: The danger presented by these weapons
is in no way subtle — it is obvious to anyone with a normal IQ. While such
things as genetic engineering and superintelligent computers promise
benefits that may seem to off set their menace, nuclear weapons offer no
benefits whatever — only death and destruction. With the exception only of
a tiny minority of dictators, military men, and politicians who see nuclear
weapons as enhancing their own power, virtually every thinking person
agrees that the world would be better off without nuclear weapons.

Yet nuclear weapons have been around for 60 years, and almost no
progress has been made toward eliminating them. On the contrary, they
proliferate: The U.S., Russia, Britain, France; then China, Israel, India,
Pakistan; now N«rth Korea, and in a few years probably Iran. . .

If reform can t solve the problem of nuclear weapons, then how can it
solve the far more subtle and difficult problems among those that modern
technology has created?

So it's clear that reform isn't working, and there's no reason to hope that
it will ever work. Obviously it's time to try something else.


II. Why Revolution May-
Succeed.



II. A. There are several reasons why revolution may succeed where reform has
made no progress.

1. Until ca 1980 I used to think the situation was hopeless, largely
because of people's thoughtlessness and passivity and their tendency to take
the easy way out. (See I. A. 6, 8-14, above.) Up to that point I had never
read much history. But then I read Thomas Carlyle's history of the French
Revolution, and it opened my eyes to the fact that, in time of revolution,
the usual rules do not apply: People behave differently. Subsequent reading
about revolutions, especially the French and the Russian ones, confirmed that
conclusion. Once a revolutionary fever has taken hold of a country, people
throw off their passivity and are willing to make the greatest efforts and
endure the greatest hardships for the sake of their revolution. In such cases it
may be that only a minority of the population is gripped by the revolutionary
fever, but that minority is sufficiently large and energetic so that it becomes
the dominant force in the country. See ISAIF §142.

2. Long before that large and dominant revolutionary minority develops,
that is, long before the revolution actually begins, an avowedly revolutionary
movement can shake a much smaller minority out of its apathy and learned
helplessness and inspire it to passionate commitment and sacrifice in a way
that a moderate and "reasonable" reform effort cannot do. See ISAIF §141.
This small minority may then show remarkable stamina and long-term
determination in preparing the way for revolution. The Russian revolutionary
movement up to 1917 provides a notable example of this.

3. The fact that revolutions are usually prepared and carried out by
minorities is important, because the system's techniques of propaganda
almost always enable it to keep the attitudes and behavior of the majority
within such limits that they do not threaten the system's basic interests.
As long as society is governed through the usual democratic processes —
elections, public-opinion polls, and other numerical indices of majority
choice — no reform movement that threatens the system's basic interests can
succeed, because the system can always contrive to have the majority on
its side. 51% who are just barely interested enough to cast a vote will always
defeat 49%, no matter how serious and committed the latter may be. But in
revolution, a minority, if sufficiently determined and energetic, can outweigh
the relatively inert majority.

4. Unlike reformers, revolutionaries are not restrained by fear of negative
consequences (see I. A. 16, above). Consider for example the emission of
greenhouse gasses and/or creation of nuclear waste associated with the
generation of electric power. Because it is unthinkable that anyone should
have to do without electricity, the reformers are largely stymied; they
can only hope that a technological solution will be found in time. But
revolutionaries will be prepared to shut down the power plants regardless of
consequences.

5. As noted above (see I. A. 15), reformers have to fight a number
of different battles, the loss of any one of which could lead either to
physical disaster or to conditions intolerably offensive to human dignity.
Revolutionaries whose goal is the overthrow of the technoindustrial system
have only one battle to fight and win.

6. As I've argued (see I.A.I), history is guided mainly by "objective"
circumstances, and if we want to change the course of history we have to
change the "objective" circumstances to that end. The dominant "objective"
circumstances in the world today are those created by the technoindustrial
system. If a revolutionary movement could bring about the collapse

of the technoindustrial system, it would indeed change the "objective"
circumstances dramatically.

7. As I've pointed out (see I. A. 17), your proposed solution through
piecemeal reform has no historical precedents. But there are numerous
precedents for the elimination through revolution of an existing form of
society. Probably the precedent most apposite to our case is that of the
Russian Revolution, in which a revolutionary movement systematically
prepared the way for revolution over a period of decades, so that when the
right moment arrived the revolutionaries were ready to strike.

8. Even if you believe that adequate reforms are possible, you should still
favor the creation of an effective revolutionary movement. It's clear that the
necessary reforms — if such are possible — are not currently being carried out.
Often the system needs a hard kick in the pants to get it started on necessary
reforms, and a revolutionary movement can provide that kick in the pants.

Further, if it is an error to attempt revolution — that is, if adequate
reforms are possible — then the error should be self-correcting: As soon as
the system has carried through the necessary reforms, the revolutionary
movement will no longer have a valid cause, so it will lose support and
peter out.

For example, in the U.S. during the early part of the 20th century,
insufficient attention was paid to the problems of the working class. Labor
violence ensued and provided the kick in the pants necessary to get the
government to pay attention to the problems. Because adequate reforms
were carried through, the violence died down; this in contrast to what
happened in Russia, where the Tsarist regime's stubborn resistance to reform
led to revolution.

II. B. You write: "Perhaps it would be useful to focus on specific actions
necessary to alter our present technological path rather than to use loaded
terms like 'revolution,' which may alienate as many, or more, supporters of
change as it would galvanize adherents. Or so my colleague suggests."

1. Once one has decided that the overthrow of the technoindustrial
system is necessary, there is no reason to shrink from using the word
"revolution." If a person is prepared to embrace a goal as radical as that of
overthrowing the technoindustrial system, he is hardly likely to be alienated
by the term "revolution."

Furthermore, if you want to build a movement dedicated to such a
radical goal, you can't build it out of lukewarm people. You need people who
are passionately committed, and you must be careful to avoid allowing your
movement to be swamped by a lot of well-meaning do-gooders who may be
attracted to it because they are concerned about the environment and all that,
but will shrink from taking radical measures. So you want to alienate the
lukewarm do-gooders. You need to keep them away from your movement.

A mistake that most people make is to assume that the more followers
you can recruit, the better. That's true if you're trying to win an election.
A vote is a vote regardless of whether the voter is deeply committed
or just barely interested enough to get to the polls. But when you're
building a revolutionary movement, the number of people you have is
far less important than the quality of your people and the depth of their
commitment. Too many lukewarm or otherwise unsuitable people will
ruin the movement. As I pointed out in an earlier letter, at the outset
of the Russian Revolution of 1917 the Social Revolutionary party was
numerically dominant because it was a catch-all party to which anyone
who was vaguely in favor of revolution could belong. The more radical
Bolsheviks were numerically far inferior, but they were deeply committed
and had clear goals. The Social Revolutionaries proved ineffective, and it
was the Bolsheviks who won out in the end.

2. This brings me to your argument that if the nomadic hunting-and-
gathering (NHG) society is taken as the social ideal, the pool of potential
revolutionaries would be minimal. You yourself (same page of same letter)
suggested a possible answer to this, namely, that the NHG ideal might "draw
in the most committed activists," and that is essentially the answer that I
would give. As I've just argued, level of commitment is more important
than numbers. But I would also mention that of all societies of biologically
modern humans, the nomadic hunting-and-gathering ones were those that
suffered least from the chief problems that modern society brings to the
world, such as environmental destruction, dangerous technological powers,
dominance of large organizations over individuals and small groups. This
fact certainly weighs in favor of the NHG ideal. Moreover, I think you
greatly underestimate the number of potential revolutionaries who would be
attracted by such an ideal. I may say more about that in a later letter.



III. Necessity Of Revolution

You challenge me to present evidence that "the situation is so urgent that
truly revolutionary action is demanded," and you write: "If in fact the
situation is as serious as you portray, then surely there would be other rational
thinkers who would come to the same conclusion. Where are the other
intelligent voices that see this reality, and likewise conclude that revolution is
the only option?," But there are two separate issues here: The seriousness and
urgency of the situation is one question and the call for revolution is another.

III. A. I shouldn't have to offer you any evidence on the seriousness
and urgency of the situation, because others have already done that. You're
familiar with Bill Joy's article. Jared Diamond and Richard Posner (U.S.
Circuit Judge, conservative, pro-government) have written books about the
risk of catastrophe. I'm enclosing herewith a review of these two books.
According to a review of Final Century, by the British Astronomer
Royal, Sir Martin Rees estimates that "the odds are no better than fifty-fifty
that our present civilization on Earth will survive to the end of the present
century:" (E.g.: "[Experiments at very high energies, perhaps a hundred
times those reached by today's particle accelerators, [could create] a tiny
bubble which then [would] expan at almost the speed of light, consuming
our entire galaxy for a start. In 1983 Martin Rees helped to convince
physicists that no all-destroying bubble could be born inside the accelerators
of those days. He now stresses the need for caution as accelerator energies
grow.") I don't think your colleague will dismiss any of the foregoing
people as "raving anarchists."

The people mentioned in the preceding paragraph warn of dangers in
the hope that these can be forestalled. I think there are many others who see
the situation as hopeless and believe that disaster is inevitable. Several years
ago someone sent me what seemed to be a responsible article titled "Planet
of Weeds." I didn't actually read the article, I only glanced through it,
but I think the thesis was that our civilization would cause the extinction
of most life on Earth, and that when our civilization was dead — and the
human race with it — the organisms that would survive would be the weed-
like ones, i.e., those that could grow and reproduce quickly under adverse
conditions. Many of the original members of Earth First! — before it was
taken over by the lef tists — were political conservatives and I don't think your
colleague could reasonably dismiss them as "raving anarchists." Their view
was that the collapse of industrial civilization through environmental disaster
was inevitable in the relatively near future. They felt that it was impossible
to prevent the disaster, and their goal was merely to save some remnants
of wilderness that could serve as "seeds" for the regeneration of life after
industrial society was gone.

So I think there are significant numbers of intelligent and rational
people who see the situation as more serious and urgent than I do. The
people I've mentioned up to this point have considered mainly the risk of
physical disaster. Ellul and others have addressed the issues of human dignity,
and if my recollections of his book Autopsy of Revolution are correct, Ellul
felt that there was at most a minimal chance of avoiding a complete and
permanent end to human f reedom and dignity. So Ellul too saw the situation
as worse than I see it.

III. B. Why then is rational advocacy of revolution so rare? There are
several reasons that have nothing to do with the degree of urgency or
seriousness of the situation.

1. In mainstream American society today, it is socially unacceptable to
advocate revolution. Anyone who does so risks being classified as a "raving
anarchist" merely by virtue of the fact that he advocates revolution.

2. Many would shrink from advocating revolution simply because of
the physical risk that they would run if a revolution actually occurred. Even
if they survived the revolution, they would likely have to endure physical
hardship. We live in a soft society in which most people are much more
fearful of death and hardship than the members of earlier societies were.
(The anthropologist Turnbull records the contempt that traditional Africans
have for modern man's weakness in the face of pain and death.)

3. Most people are extremely reluctant to accept fundamental changes
in the pattern of life to which they are adapted. They prefer to cling to
familiar ways even if they know that those ways will lead to disaster 50 years
in the future. Or even 40, 20, or 10 years. Turnbull observes that "few of us
would be willing to sacrifice" modern "achievements," "even in the name
of survival." Instead of "achievements" he should have said "habitual
patterns of living." Jared Diamond has pointed out that societies often cling
stubbornly to their established ways of life even when the price of doing so is
death. This alone is enough to explain why calls for revolution are hardly
ever heard outside of the most radical fringe.

4. Even people who might otherwise accept a radical change in their
way of life maybe frightened at the prospect of having to get by without
the technological apparatus on which they feel themselves to be dependent.
For instance, I know of a woman in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan who
hates the technological system with a passion and hopes for its collapse.
But in a letter to me dated August 19, 2004, she wrote: "A lightning strike
on June 30 'fried' our power inverter at the cabin. For three weeks I lived
without electricity. ...I realized how much I was dependent. I grew to hate
the night. I think that humans will do whatever possible to preserve the
electrical power grids "

5. Many people (e.g., the original Earth Firstlers whom I mentioned
above, III.A) think the system will collapse soon anyway, in which case no
revolution will be necessary.

6. Finally, there is hopelessness and apathy. The system seems so all-
powerful and invulnerable that nothing can be done against it. There's no
point in advocating a revolution that is impossible. This, rather than that
revolution is unnecessary or too extreme, is the objection I've heard from
some people. But it is precisely the general assumption that revolution
is impossible that makes it impossible in fact. If enough people could be
made to believe that revolution was possible, then it would be possible. One
of the first tasks of a nascent revolutionary movement would be to get itself
taken seriously.

III. C. Your colleague insists that "the case for revolution needs to be
demonstrated virtually beyond doubt, because it is so extreme and serious. "I
disagree. The possible or probable consequences of continued technological
progress include the extinction of the human race or even of all of the more
complex forms of life on Earth; or the replacement of humans by intelligent
machines; or a transformation of the human race that will entail the
permanent loss of all freedom and dignity as these have traditionally been
conceived. These consequences are so much more extreme and serious than
those to be expected from revolution that I don't think we need to be 100%
certain, or even 90% certain, that revolution is really necessary in order to
justify such action.

Anyway, the standard that your colleague sets for the justification of
revolution ("virtually beyond doubt") is impossibly high. Since major wars
are just as dangerous and destructive as revolutions, he would have to apply
the same standard to warfare. Does your colleague believe, for example, that
the Western democracies acted unjustifiably in fighting World War II? If
not, then how would he justify World War II under the "virtually beyond
doubt" standard?

III. D. Even if we assume that it is not known at present whether
revolution will ever be necessary or justifiable, the time to begin building
a revolutionary movement is now. If we wait too long and it turns out that
revolution is necessary, we may find that it is too late.

Revolutions can occur spontaneously. (For example, the way for the
French Revolution was not consciously prepared in advance.) But that is a
matter of chance. If we don't want to merely hope for luck, then we have
to start preparing the way for revolution decades in advance as the Russian
revolutionaries did, so that we will be ready when the time is ripe.

I suggest that as time goes by, the system's tools for forestalling or
suppressing revolution get stronger. Suppose that revolution is delayed until
after computers have surpassed humans in intelligence. Presumably the
most intelligent computers will be in the hands of large organizations such
as corporations and governments. At that point revolution may become
impossible because the government's computers will be able to outsmart
revolutionaries at every step.

Revolutions often depend for their success on the fact that the
revolutionaries have enough support in the army or among the police
so that at least some elements of these remain neutral or aid the
revolutionaries. The revolutionary sympathies of soldiers certainly played an
important part in the French and Russian Revolutions. But the armies and
police forces of the future may consist of robots, which presumably will not
be susceptible to subversion.

This is not science fiction. "[E]xperts said that between 2011 and
2015, every household will have a robot doing chores such as cleaning and
laundering." 1150 ' The Honda company already claims to have "an advanced
robot with unprecedented humanlike abilities. ASIMO walks forward

and backward, turns corners, and goes up and down stairs with ease The

future of this exciting technology is even more promising. ASIMO has the

potential to respond to simple voice commands, recognize faces [O]ne
day, ASIMO could be omite useful in some very important tasks. Like
assisting the elderly, and even helping with household chores. In essence,
ASIMO might serve as another set of eyes, ears and legs for all kinds of
people in need." Police and military applications of robots are an obvious
next step, and in fact the U.S. military is already developing robotized
fighting machines for use in combat."

So if we're going to have a revolution we had better have it before
technology makes revolution impossible. If we wait until the need for
revolution is "virtually beyond doubt," our opportunity may be gone forever.

III. E. Here's a challenge for your colleague: Outline a plausible scenario
for the future of our society in which everything turns out alright, and
does so without a collapse of the technoindustrial system, whether through
revolution or otherwise. Obviously, there may be disagreement as to what is
"alright. "But in any case your colleague will have to explain, inter alia: (1)
How he expects to prevent computers more intelligent than humans from
being developed, or, if they are developed, how he expects to prevent them
from supplanting humans; (2) how he expects to avoid the risk of biological
disaster that biotechnological experimentation entails; (3) how he expects
to prevent the progressive lowering of standards of human dignity that
we've been seeing at least since the early stages of the Industrial Revolution;
and (4) how he expects nuclear weapons to be brought under control. As
I pointed out above (see I.B.6), of all our technology-related problems,
the problem of nuclear weapons should be by far the easiest to solve, so
if your colleague can't give a good and convincing answer to question
(4) — something better than just a pious hope that mankind will see the light
and dismantle all the nukes in a spirit of brotherhood and reconciliation —
then I suggest it's time to give up the idea of reform.

First, as to the likelihood that computers will catch up with humans in
intelligence by the year 2029, which I think is the date predicted by Ray
Kurzweil: My guess is that this will not happen until significantly later than
2029. I have no technical expertise that qualifies me to offer an opinion on
this subject. My guess is based mainly on the fact that technical experts tend
to underestimate the time it will take to achieve fundamental breakthroughs.
In 1970, computer experts predicted that computers would surpass humans
in intelligence within 15 years, and obviously that didn't happen.

I do think it's highly probable that machines will eventually surpass
humans in intelligence. I'm enough of a materialist to believe that the human
brain functions solely according to the laws of physics and chemistry. In
other words, the brain is in a sense a machine, so it should be possible to
duplicate it artificially. And if the brain can be duplicated artificially, it can
certainly be improved upon.

Second, while I think it's highly probable that the technosystem is
headed for eventual physical disaster, I don't think the risk of a massive,
worldwide physical disaster within the next few decades is as high as some
people seem to believe. Again, I have no technical expertise on which to base
such an opinion. But back in the late 196is there were supposedly qualified
people who made dire predictions for the near future — e.g., Paul Ehrlich in
his book The Population Btmi. Their predictions were not entirely without
substance. They predicted the Greenhouse Effect, for example; they
predicted epidemics, and we have AIDS. But on the whole the consequences
of overpopulation and reckless consumption of natural resources have been
nowhere near as severe as these people predicted.

On the other hand, there is a difference between the doomsday prophets
of the 1960s and people like Bill Joy and Martin Rees. Certainly Paul
Ehrlich and probably many of the other 1960s doomsdayers were leftish
types, and Ieftish types, as we know, look for any excuse to rail against the
existing society; hence, their criticisms tend to be wildly exaggerated. But
Bill Joy and Martin Rees are not Ieftish types as far as I know; in fact, they
are dedicated technophiles. And dedicated technophiles are not likely to be
motivated to exaggerate the dangers of technology. So maybe I'm naive in
feeling that the risk of physical disaster is less imminent than Joy and Rees
seem to think.

The foregoing remarks are intended to clarify matters that I discussed in
my letter of 3/17/05. Now I'd like to address specifically some points raised
in your letters.

I. You write: ' Art, music, literature, and (for the most part) religion
are considered by most people to be true and important achievements of
humanity... You seem to undervalue any such accomplishments, and in fact
virtually advocate throwing them away...; art and literature are nothing more
than 'a harmless outlet for rebellious impulses.'"

I A. I did write in "Morality and Revolution": "Art, literature and the
like provide a harmless outlet for rebellious impulses — " (I think Ellul
somewhere says much the same thing.) But I've never said that art and
literature were nothing more than that. In any case, I don't advocate "throwing
away" art and literature. I do recognize that the loss of much art and
literature would be a consequence of the downfall of the technoindustrial
system, but getting rid of art and literature is not a goal.

I. B. It could be argued that the arts actually are in poor health in
modern society and have been in much better health in many primitive
societies. You claim that in our society the arts "are considered by most
people to be true and important achievements of humanity." But how often
do most people visit an art museum, listen to classical music, or read serious
literature? Very seldom, I think. Furthermore, even if we include commercial
graphic art, television, light novels, and the like among the arts, only a
small minority of people today participate actively in the arts, whether as
professionals or as amateurs. Most people participate only as spectators or
consumers of art.

Primitives too may have specialists in certain arts, but active
participation tends to be much more widespread among them than it is
in the modern world. For instance, among the African pygmies, everyone
participated in s«ng and dance. After describing the dances of the Mbuti
pygmies, their "angeborene Schauspielkunst" (inborn dramatic art), and
their music, Schebesta writes: "Here I will go into no further detail about
Mbuti art, of whatever kind, for I only wanted to show what signifi cance
all of this has for their daily life. Here opens a source that feeds the life-
energies of the primitives, that brightens and pleasantly adorns their forest
life, which is otherwise so hard. That is probably why the Mbuti are so
devoted to these pleasures."

Compare industrial society, in which most people participate in the
arts only to the extent of watching Hollywood movies, reading popular
magazines or light novels, and having a radio blaring in their ears without
actually listening to it.

Admittedly, much primitive art is crude, but this is by no means true
of all of it. You must have seen reproductions of the magnifi cent paintings
found on the walls of caves in Western Europe, and the polyphony of the
African pygmies is much admired by serious students of music. Of course,
no premodern society had a body of art that matched in range and elaborate
development the arts of present-day industrial society, and much of the latter
would undoubtedly be lost with the collapse of the system. But the argument
I would use here is that of...

I.C. The monkey and the peanut. When I was a little kid, my father told
me of a trick for catching monkeys that he had read about somewhere. You
take a glass bottle the neck of which is narrow enough so that a monkey's
clenched fist will not pass through it, but wide enough so that a monkey
can squeeze his open hand into the bottle. You put a piece of bait — say, a
peanut — into the bottle. A monkey reaches into the bottle, clutches the
peanut in his little fist, and then fi nds that he can't pull his hand out of the
bottle. He's too greedy to let go of the peanut, so you can just walk over
and pick him up. Thus, because the monkey refuses to accept the loss of the
peanut, he loses everything.

If we continue on our present course, we'll probably be replaced by
computers sooner or later. What use do you think the machines will have for
art, literature, and music? If we aren't replaced by computers, we'll certainly
be changed profoundly. See ISAIF §178. What reason do you have to
believe that people of the future will still be responsive to the art, music,
and literature of the past? Already the arts of the past have been largely
superseded by the popular entertainment media, which offer intense kicks
that make the old-time stuff seem boring. Shakespeare and Cervantes wrote,
Vermeer and Frans Hals painted for ordinary people, not for an elite
minority of intellectuals. But how many people still read Shakespeare and
Cervantes when they're not required to do so as part of a college course?
How many hang reproductions of the Old Masters' paintings on their walls?
Even if the human race still exists 200 years from now, will anyone still
appreciate the classics of art, music, and literature? I seriously doubt it. So if
we continue on our present course we'll probably lose the Western artistic
tradition anyway, and we'll certainly lose a great deal more besides.

So maybe it's better to let go of the peanut than to lose everything
by trying to hang onto it. Especially since we don't have to give up the
whole peanut. If the system collapses before it's too late, we'll retain our
humanity and our capacity to appreciate art, literature and music. It's
safe to assume then that people will continue to create art, literature, and
music as they always have in the past, and that works of high quality will
occasionally appear.

I. D. Along with art, literature, and music you mention religion. I'm
rather surprised that you regard religion as something that would be
lost with the collapse of modern civilization, since modern civilization
is notorious for its secularity. The explorer and ethnographer Vilhjalmur
Stefansson wrote: "One frequently hears the remark that no people in the
world have yet been found who are so low that they do not have a religion.
This is absolutely true, but the inference one is likely to draw is misleading. It
is not only true that no people are so low that they do not have a religion, but
it is equally true that the lower you go in the scale of human culture the more
religion you find. . . ."

Actually Stefansson's observation is not strictly accurate, but it is true
that in most primitive societies religion played a more important role than
it does in modern society. Colin Turnbull makes clear how much religious
feeling was integrated into the daily lives of the Mbuti pygmies, and
the North American Indians had a similarly rich religious life, which was
intimately interwoven with their day-to-day existence. Compare this with
the religious life of most modern people: Their theological sophistication is
virtually zero; they may go to church on Sundays, but the rest of the week
they govern their behavior almost exclusively according to secular mores.

However, a reservation is called for: It's possible that a resurgence of
religion may occur in the modern world. See the article by Bill Moyers
that I enclosed with my last letter. But I certainly hope that the kind of
kook religion described by Moyers is not the kind of religion of which your
colleague would regret the loss if the system collapsed. Among other things,
that brand of religion is irrational, intolerant, and even hate-filled. It's worth
noting that a similar current has developed within Hinduism (see enclosed
article); and of course we all know what's going on in Islam. None of this
should surprise us. Each of the great world religions claims to have exclusive
possession of the truth, and ever since their advent religion has been a source
and/or instrument of conflict, often very deadly conflict. Primitive religions,
in contrast, are generally tolerant, syncretistic, or both. I know of no
religious wars among primitives.

So if your colleague believes that modern religions would be lost with
the collapse of the system (a proposition which unf ortunately I think is very
doubtf ul), it's not clear to me why he should regret it.

II. You read me as holding that "we have now passed. ..the point at
which reform was a viable option." But that is not my view. I don't think
that reform was ever a viable option. The Industrial Revolution and
succeeding developments have resulted from the operation of "objective"
historical forces (see my letter of 10/12/04), and neither reform nor
(counter)revolution could have prevented them. However, we may now be
approaching a window of opportunity during which it may be possible to
"kill" the technoindustrial system.

A simple, decentralized organism like an earthworm is hard to kill. You
can cut it up into pieces and each piece will grow into a whole new worm. A
complex and centralized organism like a mammal is easy to kill. A blow or a
stab to a vital organ, a sufficient lowering of body temperature, or any one of
many other factors can kill a mammal.

Northwestern Europe in the 18th century was poised for the
Industrial Revolution. However, its economy was still relatively simple
and decentralized, like an earthworm. Even in the unlikely event that war
or revolution had wiped out half the population and destroyed half the
infrastructure, the survivors would have been able to pick up the pieces and
get their economy functioning again. So the Industrial Revolution probably
would have been delayed only by a few decades.

Today, on the other hand, the technoindustrial system is growing more
and more to resemble a single, centralized, worldwide organism in which
every part is dependent on the functioning of the whole. In other words,
the system increasingly resembles a complex, easy-to-kill organism like a
mammal. If the system once broke down badly enough it would "die," and
its reconstruction would be extraordinarily difficult. See ISAIF §§207-212.
Some believe that its reconstruction would even be impossible. This was the
opinion of (for example) the distinguished astronomer Fred Hoyle.

So only now, in my opinion, is there a realistic possibility of altering the
course of technoindustrial development.

Regarding the material about monkey genes — yes, it's not uncommon to
read reports of new ways of monkeying with the brain (no pun intended),
and there is plenty of reason to worry about this stuff, not so much because
employers might force their employees to take gene treatments to turn
them into workaholics (which I think is unlikely), as because increased
understanding of the brain leads to solutions that are, at the least, insulting
to human dignity.See ISAIF §§143-45, 149-156.

Regarding Ray Kurzweil's "Promise and Peril," you write, "I'm not sure
which disturb me more, his 'promises' or his 'perils'." I feel the same way.
To me they are all just perils. I'm skeptical about Kurzweil's predictions,
though. I'll bet that a lot of them will turn out to be just pie in the sky. In
the past there have been too many confident predictions about the future of
technology that have not been fulfilled. It's certainly not that I would want
to downplay the power or the danger of technology. However, I do question
Kurzweil's ability to predict the future. I'll be very surprised if everything
that he predicts actually materializes, but I won't be a bit surprised if a lot of
scary stuff happens that neither Kurzweil nor anyone else can now anticipate.
To address a few specific points f rom Kurzweil's article:
He asks: "Should we tell the millions of people afflicted with cancer and
other devastating conditions that we are canceling the development of all
bioengineered treatments because there is a risk that these same technologies
may someday be used for malevolent purposes?" Kurzweil fails to note that
cancer results largely from the modern way of life (see my letter of 3/17/05),
and the same is true of many other "devastating conditions," e.g., AIDS,
which, assuming that it occurred at all, would probably have remained
localized if it had not been for modern transportation facilities, which
spread the disease everywhere. In any case, what is at stake now are the most
fundamental aspects of the fate of the whole world. It would be senseless to
risk a disastrous outcome in order to prolong artificially the lives of people
suffering from "devastating conditions."

Throughout his essay Kurzweil romanticizes the technological way of
life, while he paints a misleading and grim picture of preindustrial life. In
my letter of 11/23/04, I pointed out some reasons for considering primitive
life better than modern life. To address specifically Kurzweil's point about
life-expectancy — he mentions an expectancy of 35 years for preindustrial
Swedish females and 33 for males. Let's split the difference and make it
34 years overall. Assuming this figure is correct, it is misleading because it
gives the impression that few people lived beyond their mid-30s. I've more
than once read statements by demographers to the effect that the low life-
expectancies of preindustrial times largely reflected the high rate of infant
and early-childhood mortality. Once the vulnerable first few years were
past, people's lives were not so very much shorter than they are today. I'm
depending on memory here and can't cite my sources. But information for
which I can cite sources is consistent with what I've just said. According to
Rousseau, in mid-18th-century France 50% of children died before reaching
the age of eight. Since mortality must have been highest in the earliest
years, let's suppose that the average age of these children at death was 3 years.
Assuming that this is applicable to Sweden, accepting the above figure of
34 years for average age at death, and setting A = average age at death of all
people who survived beyond the age of eight, we have 0.5 x 3 + 0.5 x A =
34. Solving for A gives an average age at death of 65 for those who survived
beyond the age of eight. This of course is only a crude estimate, and I'm
not suggesting that the high child mortality rate should be discounted as
a triviality, but we do see here how misleading it is to cite the 34-year life-
expectancy without further explanation. It's worth noting that about 8% of
a population of Kalahari Bushmen (hunter-gatherers) was said to consist
of persons from 60 to more than 80 years old. My recollection is that
according to the 1970 census, 10% of the American population was then
aged 65 or older. This figure has stuck in my mind because I read it not long
after reading the foregoing figure for the Bushmen.

Kurzweil states not only that technological progress proceeds
exponentially but that biological evolution has always done so. This
statement is almost meaningless. To say that something grows exponentially
means that it follows a curve of the form: y equals e to the ax power, where
"a" is a constant. So, before you can meaningfully say that a thing grows
exponentially, you have to have a quantitative measure of that thing. Where
is Kurzweil's quantitative measure of evolutionary progress? How would he
assign numerical values to fishes, amphibians, reptiles, mammals, etc., that
would show the rate of evolution in quantitative terms?

It's easy to establish quantitative measures of progress in specific
aspects of technology. E.g., one can speak of the number of operations that
a computer performs in one second. But on what quantitative measure
does Kurzweil rely in stating that overall technological progress is and
always has been exponential? I don't doubt that technological progress
has been "exponential" in some vague subjective sense, at least for the
last few centuries. A responsible commentator might say just that, or he
might say that as measured by some specified numerical index progress has
been exponential. But Kurzweiljust says flatly and without qualification:

"Exponential growth is a feature of any evolutionary process "This kind of
overconfidence is apparent also in other parts of the article, and it reinforces
my suspicion (which I mentioned in an earlier letter) that Kurzweil is more
of a showman than a serious thinker.

Again, I myself believe that technology is carrying us forward at an
accelerating and extremely dangerous rate; on that point I fully agree
with Kurzweil. But I question whether he is a responsible, balanced, and
reliable commentator.

Kurzweil admits that we can't "absolutely ensure" the survival of human
ethics and values, but he does seem to believe we can do a lot to promote
their survival. And throughout his article generally he shows his belief
that humans can to a significant degree control the path that technological
progress will take. I maintain that he is dead wrong. History shows the
futility of human efforts to guide the development of societies, and, given
that the pace of change — as Kurzweil himself says — will keep accelerating
indefinitely, the futility of such eff orts in the future will be even more certain.
So Kurzweil's ideas for limiting the dangerous aspects of technological
progress are completely unrealistic. Relevant here are my remarks about
"natural selection" (see my letter of 10/12/04). For example, "human values"
in the long run will survive only if they are the "fi ttest" values in terms of
natural selection. And it is highly unlikely that they will continue to be the
fittest values in the world of the future, which will be utterly unlike the world
that has existed heretofore.

What Kurzweil says about "distributed technologies" makes me
uneasy. He may be right in claiming that the system will tend toward the
development of decentralized facilities, thus decreasing its dependence on
centralized facilities such as power-plants, oil refineries, and so forth. The
more decentralized the system becomes, the more difficult it will be to
eliminate it. This is one reason why I oppose decentralization.

A question has to be raised about the people who are promoting all
this mad technological growth — those who do the research and those who
provide the hinds for research. Are they criminals? Should they be punished?

Concerning the recent terrorist action in Britain: Quite apart from any
humanitarian considerations, the radical Islamics' approach seems senseless.
They take a hostile stance toward whole nations, such as the U.S. or Britain,
and they indisciminately kill ordinary citizens of those countries. In doing
so they only strengthen the countries in question, because they provide
the politicians with what they most need: a feared external enemy to unite
the people behind their leaders. The Islamics seem to have forgotten the
principle of "divide and conquer": Their best policy would have been to
profess friendship for the American, British, etc. petple and limit their
expressed hostility to the elite groups of those countries, while portraying the
ordinary people as victims or dupes of their leaders. (Notice that this is the
position that the U.S. usually adopts toward hostile countries.)

So the terrorists' acts of mass slaughter seem stupid. But there may be an
explanation other than stupidity for their actions: The radical Islamic leaders
may be less interested in the eff ect that the bombings have on the U.S. or the
U.K. than in their effect within the Islamic world. The leaders' main goal may
be to build a strong and fanatical Islamic movement, and for this purpose
they may feel that spectacular acts of mass destruction are more effective
than assassinations of single individuals, however important the latter may
be. I've found some support for this hypothesis:

"[A] radical remake of the faith is indeed the underlying intention of
bin Laden and his followers. Attacking America and its allies is merely a
tactic, intended to provoke a backlash strong enough to alert Muslims to the
supposed truth of their predicament, and so rally them to purge their faith
of all that is alien to its essence. Promoting a clash of civilizations is merely
stage one. The more difficult part, as the radicals see it, is convincing fellow
Muslims to reject the modern world absolutely (including such aberrations as
democracy), topple their own insidiously secularizing quisling governments,
and return to the pure path."
