July 7, 2006

Ted Kaczysnki
to
Dr. Patrick Barriot


Dr. Barriot:
Many thanks for your kind letter of June 15, which I have received on June 26. I am especially grateful for your willingness to help my friend Joy Richards. I was able to speak with her by telephone on July 3. At that time she told me that she had made one unsuccessful attempt to call you. Probably she has not made a second attempt. But I think I had better tell you the whole story of her illness.

She came to visit me at Christmastime, 2003. We had a very satisfying series of visits, but while she was here in Colorado she coughed up a tiny amount of blood, just a few specks. Of course she consulted her physician as soon as she arrived home in California, and it turned out that she had a cancerous tumor in her right lung. I believe her oncologist called it "adenocarcinoma". On February 23, 2004, the upper lobe of her right lung was removed surgically. The tumor was small, the surgery seemed to be successful, and the oncologist told her that there was a sixty percent to eighty chance that cancer would
not kill her within five years. Unfortunately, as a result of some disruption of the nerves during surgery, she was left with severe, chronic pain; so severe that she was not able to return to her employment as an elementary-school teacher. Fortu- nately she had disability insurance that paid her three fourths of her salary as a teacher, and since her first surgery she had been living on her disability insurance. She also had participated in a medical-insurance plan offered by her employer, and that, for a certain period, covered her medical expenses. But at times she was depressed, largely I think as a result of the chronic pain, but probably also because of the uncertainty as to whether her cancer would return.

During this period the spiritual side of Joy's nature began to assume greater importance. As a small child she had had some sort of spiritual experience that had left a deep impression on her. Her mother raised her as a Christian Scientist, but in adulthood Joy was not adherent to any particular religion. At times, apparently ,she was not even certain of the existence of God, but throughout her life she remained intensely interested in the idea of God. In fact, at one time she taught a college course devoted to Somerset Maugham's novel The Razor's Edge, a book that fascinated her. I don't know whether you have ever read this book, but it is a very famous novel about a young man's search for God. After her first surgery Joy began attending Quaker meetings, but she found them unsatisfying and eventually dropped them.

For more than a year and a half Joy had no recurrence of cancer, and began to be very hopeful that she was permanently cured. However, she was still oppressed by chronic pain, and she was worried about her financial future, because the insurance program that her employer had provided would eventually expire and after that she would have to pay the insurance premiums herself, which she would not be able to do, given that she had to live on her disability insurance alone. She hoped to be able to qualify for "Medicare", a program of the United States Government that would pay her medical expenses, but this
was still very uncertain at the time. Then in the autumn of 2005 a new tumor was discovered in Joy's right lung.

For approximately this point my knowledge of Joy might live for some years longer. Meanwhile, Joy's involvement with spiritual matters was growing stronger, and she had no longer any doubt whatever of the existence of God. She began attending A Lutheran church, and she even had herself baptized, though she apparently does not believe all of the doctrines of Lutheranism and probably does not regard herself as a Lutheran. Still, it is clear that her belief in God is more important to her than ever before.

But Joy's financial situation seemed desperate and she told me that she was depressed over it. The terms of her disability insurance were such that the payments she was receiving would soon drop to one half of what her teacher's salary had been; she did some calculations and concluded that there was no way she would be able to live on that amount of money. I was feeling rather desperate myself over Joy's situation, for I love this woman truly, even though I know that her love for me has cooled. That was how matters stood when I wrote you my of June 4. But on July 3 I spoke with Joy on the telephone, and she gave me some news that -- if I understand her situation correctly -- may solve her financial problems in a tragic way. Cancer has been discovered simultaneously at several new sites in Joy's body, and her oncologist has told her that she has only from three to six months to live. This time I don't think there can be much doubt; almost certainly, Joy will be dead within six months. She doesn't seem worried about her financial situation any longer. She is four thousand dollars in debt, but I think that while she is alive she will be able to live on her credit cards, and she has insurance that will cover her debts after she dies.

I certainly shed many tears after learning on July 3 that Joy would be dead within six months, yet in a way I was relieved  by that conversation, because, for the first time, Joy seemed resigned to death. Until now she has had an intense desire to live, but during our conversation of July 3 she seemed ready to accept the end of her life, and I can reasonably hope that she will die with peace of mind.

I'm sorry that she made only one attempt to return your phone calls, but I'm not surprised. She has very little energy nowadays, and she probably will not try to call you again. if you are still willing to help, I suggest that you call Joy once in order to establish contact and gain her trust. As I've alrady indicated, she is no longer concerned about her fincancial status, given that she has at most six more months to live. But still I'm worried that she might be overconfident about her finances, and may reach the limit of what she can borrow through her credit cards before she dies. If that happens she probably will not call you to ask for help. But if you would call her perhaps once a month to ask her if she is need, and if you could offer her some degree of financial help if that should prove necessary, then I will be forever grateful to you. I do not want this woman to suffer any more than she has to during her last months.

The reason why you were unable to reach Joy by telephone on June 15 was that on June 14 she left for the state of Montana. She had to spend several days there before she became too weak to travel, because she needed to take care of some property, including important papers that she had in a safe-deposit box at the town of Lincoln, Montana. She will probably be living at home from now on, unless she is taken to a hospital when she is near death. During the day she may be out to visit a doctor's office or a hospital, but if you will call her about 7:00 AM Pacific Daylight Time, she will almost certainly be at home. That is 8:00 AM Mountain Daylight Time, 9:00 AM Central Daylight Time, and 10:00 AM Eastern Daylight Time, this last being the time for the East Coast of the United Stated. I do not know how that translates into French Time.

I will end this letter here because I want to be able to send it to you promptly. I will soon write you another letter about the problems connected with the publication of my writings in Europe. For the moment I will mention only the following. Dr. Skrbina has been traveling since June 15 and that is why he has not answered your letter to him dated June 16. I will not be surprised if your letter to Don Goede has remained unanswered. I have not found Mr. Goede to be a very reliable person: sometimes he has taken two or three months to answer a letter from me, even though the only answer required was a short note. I would further suggest that you should not put unreserved trust in Mr. Goede or Dr. Skrbina. I work with them because they are useful, but it cannot safely be assumed that their motives are unselfish.

With sincere thanks,
Ted Kaszynski

Theodore John Kaczynski 
04475-046
U.S. Penitentiary Max
P.O. Box 8500
Florence Co 81226-8500
November 24, 2006

[Corrected first draft]

Dear manager: 

I am a friend of NAAM, who lives, or lived until very recently, in your aparmtent number 5. As you know, NAAM is gravely ill with cancer. I called her November 13 and learned that she was then in very bad condition. Since then I tried to call her three times, at a time of day when she should have been home, but I got no answer. 

I conclude that she is not living in her apartment at present. Most likely she is in some hospital. 

If you know anything about what has happened to her, or if you have an address or a telephone number where she can be reached, I will be very grateful to you if you will send me that information. 

Sincerely yours,

Ted Kaczynksi 

December 2, 2006

Ted Kaczynski 
to 
Dr. patric Barriot

Dear Dr. Barriot, 

Thanks for your letters of November 14, November 15, and November 22, which I received on November 27, November 29, and December 1, respectively. I hope you have received my letter of October 31, with which I enclosed pages 2, 3, 4 of The Warrior Wind No. 2 and a copy of my letter dated October 31 to Skrbina. 

I don't know what has happened to Joy. I called her on November 13, and she told me then that she had a serious panick attack the night before. She was still feeling so bad that she was unable to continue the conversation, and we had to break it off after about five minutes. Since then I have repeatedly tried to call her, both at her home phone number and at her cell-phone number, but I get no answer. If she is still alive, I suppose she must be at the home of a certain friend, or, more likely, in a hospital. No one has sent me news of her. You can imagine how worried I am. I will try once more to call her on Monday, Dec 4, and if I still get no answer I will write to her brother and to two of her friends, whose addresses I have, and ask them whether they have news of her. 

As far as I know, Joy has never anything like a panic attack before, so I wonder whether the cancer, or some of the medications she takes, have been affecting her brain. The doctors told her that the type of cancer she has often metastasizes to the brain. She has already had one brain tumor removed.

To anwser your letters --

November 14, 2006. The verison of "Morality and Revolution" that you sent me can be considered definitive, except that the following typographical errors need to be corrected: Page 3, last paragraph, first line: "Six principles" should be "Six

Theodore John Kaczynski 
04475-046
P.O. Box 8500 
Florence CO 81226-8500
December 4, 2006

[Corrected first draft]

Dear

I'm writing to you about our mutual friend, NAAM.  

As you undoubtedly know, she is so ill with cancer that she isn't likely to live long.

I called her on November 13, and she told me that had a serious panic attack the night before. She was still feeling so bad that she was unable to continue the conversation, and we had to break it off after about five minutes.

Since then I have tried to call her several times between 6:30 AM and 8:00 AM (pacific time), when she should have been home, but I've gotten no answer. I haven't been able to get her on her cell phone, either; it appears to be turned off. 

Do you have any news of NAAM. Do you know where she is now? Do you have a mailing address or a telephone number where she can be reached? If you can give me any such information, I will be very grateful to you. 

If you are in touch with NAAM, please give her my love and tell her that I have some things to send her for Christmas, but I don't know where to send them. 

Sincerely yours, 

Ted Kaczynski 

There are two difficulties connected with
the characteristic victimization issues of the left, such as the alleged
oppression of women, homosexuals, racial or ethnic minorities, and animals.

First, these issues distract attention from the technology problem.
Rebellious energies that might have been directed against the technological
system are expended instead on the irrelevant problems of racism, sexism, etc.
Therefore it would have been better if these problems had been completely
solved. In that case they could not have distracted attention f rom the
technology problem.

But revolutionists should not attempt to solve the problems of racism,
sexism, and so forth, because, in addressing these problems, they would
further distract attention from the problem of technology. Furthermore,
revolutionists could contribute very little to the solution of the problems
of women, minorities, etc., because technological society itself is already
working to solve these problems. Every day (at least in the United States) the
media teach us that women arc equal to men, that homosexuals should be
respected, that all races should receive equal treatment, and so forth. Hence,
any efforts in this direction by revolutionists would be superfluous.

Through their obsessive concentration on victimization issues such as
the alleged oppression of women, homosexuals, and racial minorities, leftists
vastly increase the extent to which these issues distract attention from the
technology problem. But it would be counterproductive for revolutionists to
try to obstruct leftists' efforts to solve the problems of women, minorities,
and so forth, because such obstruction would intensify the controversy over
these issues and therefore would distract even more attention from the
technology problem.

Instead, revolutionists must repeatedly point out and emphasize that the
energy expended on the leftists' victimization issues is wasted, and that that
energy should be expended on the technological problem.

A second difficulty connected with victimization issues is that any group
that concerns itself which such issues will attract leftists.

As the Manifesto argues, leftists are useless as revolutionists because
most of them don't really want to overthrow the existing form of society.

They are interested only in satisfying their own psychological needs through
vehement advocacy of "causes." Any cause will do as long as it is not
specifically right-wing.

Thus, when any movement (other than a right-wing movement) arises
that aspires to be revolutionary, leftists come swarming to it like flies to
honey until they outnumber the original members of the movement, take it
over, and transform it into a leftist movement. Thereaf ter the movement is
useless for revolutionary purposes. The case of the movement called Earth
First! provides a neat example of this process. (See Martha F. Lee, Earth
First!: Environmental Apocalypse, Syracuse University Press, Syracuse, New
York, 1995.) Thus, the left serves as a mechanism for emasculating nascent
revolutionary movements and rendering them harmless.

Therefore, in order to form an effective movement, revolutionists
must take pains to exclude leftists from the movement. In order to drive
away leftists, revolutionists should not only avoid involvement in efforts
to help women, homosexuals, or racial minorities; they should specifically
disavow any interest in such issues, and they should emphasize again and
again that women, homosexuals, racial minorities, and so forth should
consider themselves lucky because our society treats them better than
most earlier societies have done. By adopting this position, revolutionists
will separate themselves from the left and discourage leftists from
attempting to join them.

You seem to think that increasing the pressure to which people are subject
in modern society will be sufficient to produce a revolution. But this is
not correct. Certainly a serious grievance must be present in order for a
revolution to occur, but a serious grievance, or even the greatest suffering, by
itself is not sufficient to bring about a revolution. People who have studied
the process of revolution are agreed that in addition to a grievance, some
precipitating factor is necessary. The precipitating factor might be a dynamic

leader, some extraordinary event, or anything that arouses new hope that
rebellion can bring relief from the grievance.
Thus Trotsky wrote:

"In reality the mere existence of privations is not enough to cause an

insurrection It is necessary that... new conditions and new ideas should

open the prospect of a revolutionary way out."

In the opinion of the philosopher-sociologist Eric Hoffer: "[T]he
presence of an outstanding leader is indispensable. Without him there will
be no movement. The ripeness of the times does not automatically produce a
mass movement... ."

Similarly the Encyclopaedia Britannica: "The rank and file of any group;
especially a big one, have been shown to be remarkably passive until aroused
by quasi-parental leaders whom they admire and trust."

Of course, the prerequisites for revolution are much more complex than
the mere presence of dynamic leaders or of "new conditions and new ideas"
that arouse hope. For an extended discussion, see Neil J. Smelser, Theory of
Collective Behavior, Macmillan Company, New York, 1971, pages 313-384.
The point is, however, that revolutionists cannot simply wait passively for
hard conditions to produce a revolution. Instead, revolutionists must actively
prepare the way for revolution.

I should add that the remarks about leftism, here and in the Manifesto,
are based on observation of the American left. I do not know whether the
remarks can be applied without modification to the European left.

You write: "Let us not deceive ourselves about the real role of women." If you
mean that motherhood is the only suitable role for women, then I disagree.
quite apart from child-rearing, women have always done very important,
even indispensable work, and work that was of ten very hard physically or
required great skill. To mention only a few examples: Among the Mbuti
pygmies of Africa and exclusive of child-rearing, the women worked far more
than the men, they provided the greater part of the food, they built the huts,
and their work was often very hard. Among other things, they carried huge
stacks of firewood into camp on their backs. The women of hunting-and-
gathering societies of warm climates usually provided the greater part of the
food, whereas in cold countries the men provided the greater part through
hunting. But in cold countries the women produced the clothing, which
in such climates was indispensable, and in doing so the women of certain
hunting-and-gathering societies showed extraordinary skill.

Thus, without denying the importance of their role as mothers, we must
also acknowledge the importance of the role of women as laborers and skilled
handworkers. And moreover I maintain that womenjust as much as men,
need work, that is, activities directed toward a goal (the "power process").
And I suspect that the reason why today's women want to take up masculine
occupations is that their role as mother is not enough to satisfy them now
that technology has reduced other traditional feminine occupations to
triviality. The modern woman doesn't need to make clothes, because she can
buy them; she doesn't need to weave baskets, because she has at her disposal
any number of good containers; she doesn't need to look for fruits, nuts, and
roots in the forest, because she can purchase good food; and so forth.

You write: '"The system operates so insidiously that it talks ethnic minorities
into believing that the loss of their identity is a good thing. Minorities are
manipulated to their own disadvantage, and entirely without any perceptible
compulsion. "Yes, I agree with this, except that in some countries the system
is more cunning: Instead of telling ethnic minorities that the loss of their
identity is a good thing it tells them to maintain their ethnic identity, but at
the same time the system knows very well how to drain ethnic identity of its
real content and reduce it to empty external forms. This has happened both
in the United States and in the Soviet Union.

Of course, I know very little about German universities, but American
university intellectuals, apart from rare exceptions, are not at all suited to be
members of an effective revolutionary movement. The majority belong to the
left. Some of these intellectuals might make themselves useful by spreading
ideas about the technology problem, but most of them are frightened at the
idea of the overthrow of the system and cannot be active revolutionaries.
They are the "men of words" of whom Eric Hoffer has spoken:

"The preliminary work of undermining existing institutions, of
familiarizing the masses with the idea of change, and of creating a receptivity
to a new faith, can be done only by men who are, first and foremost,
talkers or writers... .Thus imperceptibly the man of words undermines the
established institutions, discredits those in power, weakens prevailing beliefs
and loyalties, and sets the stage for the rise of a mass movement."

"When the old order begins to fall apart, many of the vociferous men of
words, who prayed so long for the day, are in a funk. The first glimpse of the
face of anarchy frightens them out of their wits."

"The creative man of words, no matter how bitterly he may criticize and
deride the existing order, is actually attached to the present. His passion is
to reform and not to destroy. When the mass movement remains wholly in
his keeping, he turns it into a mild affair. The reforms he initiates are of the
surface, and life flows on without a sudden break."

You write: "The movement should be a completely new beginning, beyond all
positions of the left and of the right."Yes indeed! I agree completely!

You're right: We need to worry about the time factor. But we also have
to take into consideration the possibility that the struggle will last a very
long time, perhaps many decades. We should overthrow the system as soon
as possible, but we must nevertheless prepare ourselves for a long-term
revolutionary effort, because it may turn out that no quick overthrow of the
system will be feasible.

You point out that technological progress proceeds at lightning speed;
that it will take perhaps twenty years to develop the first computers that will
surpass every human brain in computing power; that genetic engineering will
inevitably be applied for the "improvement" of human beings; that new drugs
will be developed. All of this may be true. But the future may be different
from what we expect. For example:

"A scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology believes that
within eight years a machine with more intelligence than the genius level
will be developed — Other scientists. . .disagreed only on the timetable. They
suggested IS years "

This is from the newspaper The Chicago Daily News, November 16,
1970. Obviously, what the scientists predicted has not happened. Similarly,
attempts to cure certain human diseases by means of genetic technology
have run into difficulties: Gene therapy can cause cancer. Thus it is possible
that computers may not surpass human beings in intelligence as soon as
is believed; genetic engineering may not be so easily applied to humans,
and so forth. On the other hand, it is also possible that these developments
will proceed even faster than anyone now suspects. In any case the social
consequences of the new technology are unforeseeable and may be diff erent
from what we expect. The social consequences of the technological progress
that has occurred up to the present time are different from what I expected
when I was young. Therefore we have to prepare ourselves for all possibilities,
including the possibility that our struggle may last a very long time.

There are two mistakes that almost all people, with the exception of
experienced politicians and social scientists, make when they devise a plan
for changing society.

The first mistake is that one works out a plan through pure reason, as if
one were designing a bridge or a machine, and then one expects the plan to
succeed.

One can successfully design a bridge or the like because material objects
reliably obey precise rules. Thus one can predict how material objects will
react under given circumstances. But in the realm of social phenomena we
have at our disposal very few reliable, exact rules; therefore, in general, we
cannot reliably predict social phenomena.

Among the few reliable predictions that we can make is the prediction
that a plan will not succeed. If you let an automobile without a driver roll
down a rough slope, you can't predict the route that the automobile will
take, but you can predict that it will not follow a previously selected route.
If you release a group of mice from a cage, you can't predict which way each
mouse will run, but you can predict that the mice will not march in accord
with a previously specified plan. So it goes, in general, in the domain of
social phenomena.

Social scientists understand how difficult it is to carry out any long-
term plan:

"History has no lessons for the future except one: that nothing ever
works out as the participants quite intended or expected.

"World War I... ended in various plans for peace as illusory as the plans
for war had been. As the historian William McNeill wrote, 'The irrationality
of rational, professionalized planning could not have been made more
patently manifest.'

"Most social planning is short-term...; the goals of planning are often
not attained, and, even if the plan is successful in terms of the stated goals, it
often has unforeseen consequences. The wider the scope and the longer the
time span of planning, the more difficult it is to attain the goals and to avoid
unforeseen and undesired consequences Large-scale and long-term social
developments in any society are still largely unplanned."

The foregoing is indisputably true, and moreover it refers to the plan
of the State. The State has power, vast quantities of information, and the
capacity to analyze and utilize such quantities of information. We have no
power and relatively little capacity to gather and analyze information. If it is
impossible for the State to carry out a long-term social plan successfully, then
all the more is it impossible for us.

Therefore I maintain that revolutionaries should not commit themselves
to any predetermined, long-term or comprehensive plan. Instead, they
should as far as possible rely on experience and proceed by trial and error,
and commit themselves only to simple, short-term plans. Of course,
revolutionaries should also have a comprehensive, long-term plan, but this
must always be provisional, and the revolutionaries must always be ready to
modify the comprehensive plan or even abandon it altogether, provided that
they never forget the final goal, which is to overthrow the system. In other
words, the movement must be flexible and prepared for all eventualities.

The second of the above-mentioned errors is that one proposes a plan
(let us assume that it is a very good plan) and then believes that a sufficient
number of people will follow the plan merely because it is a good one. But if
the goal of a plan is to change society, then, however excellent the plan may
be, its excellence is not what will move people to follow it. We have to take
human motivations into consideration.

In private life pure reason may often move a person to follow a good
plan. For example, if through the use of reason we can convince a person
that one doctor is more skillful than another, then the person will probably
consult the more skillful doctor, because he knows that in this way he will
recover better from his ailment.

On the other hand, if we can convince a person that a certain plan
will be useful to society provided that a sufficient number of people
follow the plan, this provides the person with at most a very weak
motive to follow the plan, for he knows that it is very unlikely, or even
impossible, that his own individual participation will by itself have any
perceptible effect on society. For example: Many people know that it
would be better for the world if everyone refused to use automobiles.
Nevertheless, apart from rare exceptions, each one of these people has
his automobile, because he says to himself that if he refuses to drive he
will suffer great inconvenience without doing any perceptible good for
the world; for the world will derive no perceptible advantage unless many
millions of people refuse to use automobiles.

So we must always bear in mind that, with only rare exceptions, a
person joins a revolutionary movement not primarily in order to achieve the
movement's objective, but in order to fulfill his own psychological or physical
needs or to experience some form of pleasure. However loyal and sincerely
devoted he may later be to the revolutionary goal, his devotion has in some
way grown out of his own needs or out of the pleasures he has experienced.
Of course, the attainment of a movement's goal can fulfill the needs of a
member, but in general only the actions of a few leaders can perceptibly
increase the likelihood that the goal will be attained. As previously indicated,
the rank-and-file member knows that his own individual participation will
have at most only an imperceptible effect on the progress toward the goal.
Therefore the goal by itself, and through cold reason alone, cannot motivate
the rank-and-file member.

Since enthusiasm produces great pleasure, enthusiasm for a strongly
desired goal can be enough to move a person to revolutionary action, but
only when the attainment of the goal is very near. When the attainment of
the goal appears to be improbable or distant in time, the goal by itself cannot
arouse much enthusiasm.

When the attainment of the goal is not near, then the following
satisfactions, for example, can motivate the rank-and-fi le member of a
revolutionary movement: (i) Sense of purpose, the feeling that one has a
goal around which to organize one's life, (ii) Sense of power, (iii) Sense of
belonging, the feeling of being part of a cohesive social group, (iv) Status
or prestige within the movement; the approval of other members of the
movement, (v) Anger, revenge; the opportunity to retaliate against the system.

Of course, one can also find satisfaction in one's contribution to the
future attainment of the revolutionary goal, even if one's own individual
contribution has only an imperceptible effect, but in that case the satisfaction
is too weak to move anyone to make significant revolutionary efforts — apart
from rare, exceptional cases. Therefore a revolutionary movement must be
based chiefly on other motivations.


As for the sense of power — a cell consisting of ten people cannot afford a
member much sense of power. The member will gain a sense of power only
when he joins the power-holding circles of society, and then the member
receives his sense of power not from the revolutionary movement but from
his position within the system. He has perhaps one chance in a hundred of
gaining a position of power, and he can reach such a position only through
efforts extending over a long period.

A person will undertake such efforts and persist in them only if he
finds satisfaction in his career. Let us assume, then, that a member of a
revolutionary cell has had a successf ul career and after twenty years of
effort has joined the power-holding circles. He likes his career, he now has
power, and he has achieved these satisfactions through long years of effort.
Will he want to lose all this through the destruction of the system? In rare,
exceptional cases he will, but usually he will not. History offers countless
examples of the young, hot-blooded rebel who swears to resist the system
forever, but who then has a successful career, and when he is older and richer
and has status and prestige, he comes to the conclusion that the system is not
so bad after all, and that it is better to adapt himself to it.

There are further reasons to believe that your plan cannot succeed. The
plan requires that the movement should remain secret and unknown to the
public. But that is impossible. One can be quite sure that some member of
the movement will change his mind or make a mistake, so that the existence
of the movement will become publicly known. Then there will be official
investigations and so forth. In history one finds examples of sophisticated spy
networks the secrecy of which was carefully guarded, but which nevertheless
became known, though some of their cells may have succeeded in remaining
secret. The existence of the movement that you propose likewise would surely
become known.

In the fourth section of your letter you propose that leaders and agitators
from the ranks of the leftists should be "instructed" by members of the
movement. But, apart from exceptional cases, it is impossible to believe that
members of the movement could have so much control over people who have
the ability to become successful leaders and agitators.

If you succeeded in infiltrating into the power-holding circles just three
or four revolutionaries who, moreover, did not subsequently betray the
revolution in order to keep their power and their prestige, that would be an
amazing success. Such infiltrators could perhaps play a role in the revolution,
but their role probably would not be decisive.

You say that revolutions are never planned on a drawing-board, and you
are right. But I wouldn't say that revolutions have always been attributable
to the dissatisfactions of some large segment of a society. Dissatisfaction
is a precondition for revolution, but dissatisfaction by itself is not enough
to bring about a revolution. I've emphasized that previously. Among other
things a revolutionary myth is needed, and on this subject you write that
revolutions have never chosen their ideals and myths freely, which is quite
true. But then you write: "The circumstances under which people live
leave them no other choice than to adopt exactly these myths and ideals
and no others." I do not entirely agree with this. A myth can't be chosen
arbitrarily. A myth can succeed only if it responds to the prevailing (perhaps
in part unconscious) dissatisfactions and yearnings. But I'm not convinced
that the circumstances under which people live always must precisely
determine a single myth. For example: The Prophet Mohammed created an
extraordinarily successful myth when he wrote the Koran. Would you venture
to say that nothing other than precisely the Koran could have responded to
the yearnings of the Arabs?

Even if you were right and for each revolution only a single myth were
possible, still we would not be entitled to assume that people would develop
the right myth on their own, and develop it in time. The myths of the
French and Russian revolutions were not developed by the people at large,
but by a small number of intellectuals. Maybe the work of the intellectuals
consisted only in giving form and structure to the formless or unconscious
dissatisfactions and yearnings of the nation; nevertheless, this work was
indispensable for the success of the revolution.

So I maintain that the task of revolutionaries is not to increase or
intensify the objective grounds for dissatisfaction. There are already
plenty enough grounds for dissatisfaction. Instead, revolutionaries should
do the following:

(a) There are certain counterf eit grounds for dissatisfaction (e.g., the
alleged problems of women, ethnic minorities, homosexuals, cruelty to
animals, etc.), that serve to divert attention from the real grounds for
dissatisfaction. Revolutionaries must somehow circumvent or negate these
diversionary tactics.

(b) Revolutionaries must bring into effective operation the genuine but
as yet poorly perceived grounds for dissatisfaction.

(c) To this end revolutionaries must (among other things) develop
a revolutionary myth. This doesn't mean that they should invent a myth
arbitrarily. Instead, they must discover and bring to light the real myth that
already exists in inchoate form, and give it a definite structure.

You are right in saying that the role of the revolutionaries is only that of
a catalyst. Revolutionaries can't create a revolution from nothing. All they
can do is realize those possibilities that are offered by the conditions under
which people live, just as a catalyst can bring about a chemical reaction
only if all of the necessary reagents are available. You seem to believe that
one can best play the role of a catalyst by intensifying the objective grounds
for dissatisfaction. But I am convinced that the objective grounds for
dissatisfaction are already sufficient. In order to play the role of a catalyst one
must achieve a psychological effect; for example, by discovering and utilizing
the right myth.

There are many young people who recognize that the technological system is
destroying our world and our freedom; they want to resist it, but they know
that they can't achieve anything alone, theref ore they look for a group or a
movement that they can join. Under the circumstances existing today, they
can find no groups or movements other than the leftist or similar ones. So a
young person joins one of these groups and either is converted to its ideology
or else gets discouraged, leaves the group, gives up, and becomes apathetic.
What is needed is a real revolutionary movement that such young people
could join before they are lured by some leftist group and ruined by it.


Speeding up the system. It is not always safer to proceed on the assumption
that the worst case will occur. For example: We are on a ship that is
sinking. The "worst case" is that the ship will sink within two minutes. So
we immediately throw the boat into the water, jump into the boat and
row hurriedly away from the ship. Then we notice that we are going to die
because we haven't taken any food or water with us. It would have been
better to provide ourselves with food and water instead of rowing away in
such a hurry, for the ship has not sunk as fast as we feared. But now it's too
late....

So we should not prepare ourselves for the worst case only but, as far as
possible, for all cases.

You maintain that we should speed up the action of "the machine" (that
is, of the system) so that the machine will destroy itself. But in destroying
itself the machine will also destroy us and our world, and perhaps all higher
forms of life. Remember that not all of the destructive processes initiated by
the system will stop as soon as the system falls apart. Consider for example
the greenhouse effect.

"[G]lobal climate systems are booby-trapped with tipping points and
feedback loops, thresholds past which the slow creep of environmental decay
gives way to sudden and sclf-pcrpctuating collapse. Pump enough C02
into the sky, and that last part per million of greenhouse gas behaves like
the 212th degree Fahrenheit [212 Fahrenheit = 100 Celsius] that turns a
pot of hot water into a plume of billowing steam "Things are happening
a lot faster than anyone predicted, 'says Bill Chameides, chief scientist
for the advocacy group Environmental Defense and a former professor of
atmospheric chemistry. 'The last 12 months have been alarming,' adds Ruth
Curry of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute in Massachusetts. "The
ripple through the scientific community is palpable.'. . .Is it too late to reverse
the changes global warming has wrought? That's still not clear — " Time
magazine, April 3, 2006, pages 35, 36.

By releasing so much carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, the system has
already disrupted the Earth's climate to such an extent that even specialists
in the field can't predict the consequences. Even if the system immediately
stopped releasing carbon dioxide, the Earth's climate probably would not
revert to its previous condition. No one knows where our climate will go. We
don't even know for certain whether the Earth will still be inhabitable at the
end of this century. Of course, the more carbon dioxide the system releases,
the greater the danger is. Yes, the system could destroy itself by progressing
faster and releasing greater quantities of carbon dioxide, but in the process it
would destroy everything else, too.

I have already emphasized that what could lead to a revolution would
not be the worsening of living conditions, but a psychological situation
conducive to revolution. And one of the indispensable psychological
preconditions for revolution is that people should have hope. If there's no
hope, there will be no revolution. A serious problem is the fact that many of
the most intelligent people have already lost hope.lhey think that it's too
late, the Earth can't be saved. If we speeded up the destructive action of the
system , we would only spread and deepen this hopelessness. 