THEODORE JOHN KACZYNSKI

February 1, 2007

Dear Mr. Tanner, 

On January 31, I received your letter dated January 23. I'm rather shocked that you ask no questions about what is far and away the most important issue in this case, namely, the First Amendment issue. If you've read my October court filing, you should be aware that the government has proposed to round up and seize every copy of everything I've ever written or ever will write. This is a barefaced attempt to suppres both my ideas and the truth about the Unabom case.

To such an attempt you are perhaps indifferent. But if the government is allowed to suppress my ideas or the truth about the Unabom case, then it will soon suppress something else, and some day it will suppress the ideas and the truths that you think are important. Who was it who said, "Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty"?

You ask why it is important to bar sale of my past possessions. It is important to bar sale of my papers because they will be sold to private parties who probably will not make the papers available to the public, or will make available only a selected sample that will give a slanted picture of the Unabom case. I want to put the papers in libraries where they will be available to scholars, researchers, and the public generally.

As for property on other than papers and the like, it is the government that wants to bar sale of some of that property. I want all property, apart from papers and other First Amendment expressive materials, to be either sold or returned to me, at the government's option.

If you want further details about the First Amendment issues at stake here, I suggest you call John Balazs, 916-447-9299.

Sincerely yours, 

Ted Kaczynski

July 15, 2007

Ted Kaczynski 
to 

[Corrected first draft]

Dear

Thanks for your letter of 7/7/07, which I received on 7/13/07. To answer your questions: 

First, from the box you received from NAAM, you can send everything to NAAM except: 
(a): the bound copy of the Manifesto
(b): the bound copy of Truth versus Lies
(c): anything that Sherril Redman says she doesn't want (she probably won't ONLEESBAAR any ONLEESBAAR published books unless they have a lot of Joy's handwriting in them).

Second, NAAM is Director of the Sophia Smith Collection, ath the Smith College, which is Joy's alma mater. I'm enclosing herewith a brochure that Sherrill Redman sent me some time ago; the brochure explains pretty well what NAAM is collecting. 

Third, yes, all of the correspondence between Joy and me has gone to the Sophia Smith Collection -- except anything you may have in that box and any letters that Chris Bass may still be holding. Joy still felt a strange attachment to Smith College, and that must be why she wanted our correspondence to go there.

Fourth, I probably do not have -- I mean, I probably never had - a copy of the letter No. 208, of 7/1/06, that you mention, but you can just send it straight to NAAM. If you sent it to me it would only stir up my grief. 

I should mention that about a year ago I asked NAAM to pay the shipping costs for the materials I had sent her, and she said she would do so but that it migth take some time. I have not yet received the reimbursement. So I very recently sent Ms. Redman a reminder. I'm quite sure there is no intentional malfeasance involved -- Smith College is a highly respected institution -- but due to ineffeciency, forgetfulness, or whatever, it may take you awhile to 

* Except some photos, cards, and so forth that I'm saving as

TED KACZYNSKI to ADAM TANNER REUTERS AMERICA

February 23, 2007

Dear Mr. Tanner: 

Today I received your letter dated February 12, 2007, in which you tell me that you wrote an article for the Reuters wire outlining the views I expressed in my letter to you of February 1, 2007. Before I answer your additional questions I would like to receive a copy of your article, so that I can tell whether it was a mistake for me to answer your first letter.

Also, when I wrote you my letter of February 1 it appeared that I was going to have to act as my own lawyer in my current appeal, but it now seems likely that I will have representation in this appeal. Before I answer further questions from you or any other journalist, I should consult with my prospective lawyers. It would be, at the least, discourteous for me to communicate with the media without first consulting them. 

Sincerely yours, 
Ted Kaczynski